fern/providers/voice/sesame.mdx, before:

---
title: Sesame
subtitle: What is Sesame CSM-1B?
slug: providers/voice/sesame
---

**What is Sesame CSM-1B?**

Sesame CSM-1B is an open source text-to-speech (TTS) model that Vapi hosts for seamless integration into your voice applications. Currently in beta, this model delivers natural-sounding speech synthesis with a single default voice option.

**Key Features:**

- **Vapi-Hosted Solution**: Access this open source model directly through Vapi without managing your own infrastructure
- **Single Default Voice**: Currently offers one voice option optimized for clarity and naturalness
- **Beta Release**: Early access to this emerging TTS technology

**Integration Benefits:**

- Simplified setup with no need to self-host the model
- Consistent performance through Vapi's optimized infrastructure
- Seamless compatibility with all Vapi voice applications

**Use Cases:**

- Virtual assistants and conversational AI
- Content narration and audio generation
- Interactive voice applications
- Prototyping voice-driven experiences

**Current Limitations:**

As this is a beta release, the model currently offers limited customization options with only one default voice available. Additional features and voice options may be introduced in future updates.

Commit message:

VAP-9999 Sesame Voice Cloning (#322)
* sesame cloning docs

* thanks!

fern/providers/voice/sesame.mdx, after:

---
title: Sesame
subtitle: What is Sesame CSM-1B?
slug: providers/voice/sesame
---

**What is Sesame CSM-1B?**

Sesame CSM-1B is an open source text-to-speech (TTS) model that Vapi hosts for seamless integration into your voice applications. This model delivers natural-sounding speech synthesis with a default voice option and voice cloning capabilities.

**Key Features:**

- **Vapi-Hosted Solution**: Access this open source model directly through Vapi without managing your own infrastructure
- **Voice Options**: Offers a default voice and voice cloning capabilities

**Integration Benefits:**

- Simplified setup with no need to self-host the model
- Consistent performance through Vapi's optimized infrastructure
- Seamless compatibility with all Vapi voice applications

**Use Cases:**

- Virtual assistants and conversational AI
- Content narration and audio generation
- Interactive voice applications
- Prototyping voice-driven experiences

**Voice Cloning:**

![Sesame Voice Cloning](/static/images/voice-tab/sesame/cloning.png)

Sesame supports voice cloning. To clone a voice:
1. Navigate to the additional configuration tab (below the voice tab) on the assistants page
2. Upload a WAV file containing your voice sample
3. Provide the transcript of the audio file
4. Name your custom voice

**Current Limitations:**

The model currently has some limitations. Additional features may be introduced in future updates.
