fern/providers/voice/vapi-voices/legacy-migration.mdx, before:

---
title: Legacy voice migration guide
subtitle: Learn to migrate from legacy Vapi Voices before March 1, 2026
slug: providers/voice/vapi-voices/legacy-migration
---

## Voice availability update

We're updating Vapi Voices. The following legacy voices are being phased out and will be retired on **March 1, 2026**:

- Spencer
- Neha
- Harry
- Cole
- Paige
- Hana
- Lily
- Kylie
- Rohan

## What this means

- **Existing assistants** using these voices will continue to work during the transition period
- **New assistants** can no longer be created using legacy voices
- **After March 1, 2026**, any assistants still using legacy voices will be automatically switched to the default replacement voice (Option 1 in the table below)

## Replacement voice mapping

We've selected replacement voices from ElevenLabs using their voice matching tool to find the closest match in tone and style. These voices are priced similarly to your existing voice.

<Note>
**Option 1 is the default fallback** — if you don't switch by March 1, your assistant will automatically be switched to the Option 1 voice.
</Note>

| Legacy Voice | Option 1 (Default Fallback) | Option 2 | Option 3 |
|--------------|----------------------------|----------|----------|
| Spencer | Penelope - `JpjuQfOymR78GvGgYe0U` | Marissa - `L0yTtpRXzdyzQlzALhgD` | Larissa - `StXdHzik5guDrDk6fg3m` |
| Neha | Navya Kannan - `Lw21wLjWqPPaL3TcYWek` | Riya Rao - `l69wlWTZVIKv0UxMucTn` | Simran - `1ea3IFhmSWgw8sJkSvfJ` |
| Harry | Rick - `hUcrqyP5BNIsY3bMyY9A` | Piksel - `iq1GS1mcjc63xtqTrsFh` | Micheal - `F6d1zUrtT0hMMRrPcNx3` |
| Cole | Terrence - `MFeqle9Un0xiXpndMbD7` | James - `IdAziNk2dxibsP2mRgAK` | Derek - `Q0Et7LOU7VpeoeCRQAVS` |
| Paige | Jöne - `UShdpPZj9t1Kgb9ACOS2` | Nessa - `6qA4mbnKOyDYLLQmx3n5` | Kimber - `fQ74DTbwd8TiAJFxu9v8` |
| Hana | Celeste - `wSRCyzJYBsTZLFcumuu8` | Freya - `u8ADrbquiJqufR9XMtb8` | Seema - `sLoLgWyZ6rs3nXR71t49` |
| Lily | Tanya - `7sAIIIXrQKek5xiLc1R6` | Melissa - `JH3fX8OSjg6sNdEtPjxr` | Ariel - `TPbSfDVirzpiSkim8gMw` |
| Kylie | Chanelle - `t5ztDJA7pj9EyW9QIcJ2` | Aryannah - `vOJuCTA36jkG6q1OskrK` | Riley - `kXsOSDWolD7e9l1Z0sbH` |
| Rohan | Manav - `T8lgQl6x5PSdhmmWx42m` | Elixified - `xCyfAutjCrYQhbBDS4l8` | Joseph - `8fcyCHOzlKDlxh1InJSf` |

## FAQs

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="How were the replacement voices selected?">
    We used ElevenLabs' voice matching tool to find the most appropriate replacements for each legacy voice based on tone, style, and characteristics. Replacements are from the same provider at the same pricing.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="What happens if I don't switch by March 1?">
    Any assistants still using legacy voices after March 1, 2026 will be automatically switched to the Option 1 (default fallback) voice shown in the table above.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Will my pricing change?">
    Replacement voices were chosen at the same pricing.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="How do I switch my voice now?">
    You can switch your assistant's voice in two ways:

    1. **Dashboard:** Go to your assistant settings and select a new voice from the dropdown
    2. **API:** Update the `voiceId` field in your assistant configuration via the API
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Can I choose a different replacement voice?">
    Yes! We provide three recommended options for each legacy voice, but you're free to choose any available voice that fits your needs. We encourage you to switch before March 1 so you can select the voice that works best for you.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="I'm an Enterprise customer — can I get help with the transition?">
    Yes. Your account team will reach out with personalized support. If you have questions in the meantime, contact your account team directly.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Who can I contact if I have questions?">
    Reach out to [support@vapi.ai](mailto:support@vapi.ai) or contact your account team if you're an Enterprise customer.
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

Commit message:

docs: update legacy voice migration with staying voices
- Add section listing voices that are staying (not being retired)
- Clarify that Elliot, Savannah, Leo, Zoe, Mia, Jess, Zac, Dan, Leah, Tara will continue to be supported
- Add FAQ about staying voices
- Reorganize document with clear section headers

fern/providers/voice/vapi-voices/legacy-migration.mdx, after:

---
title: Legacy voice migration guide
subtitle: Learn to migrate from legacy Vapi Voices before March 1, 2026
slug: providers/voice/vapi-voices/legacy-migration
---

## Voice availability update

We're updating Vapi Voices. Some legacy voices are being phased out while others will continue to be available.

### Voices being retired on March 1, 2026

The following voices will be retired and are no longer available for new assistants:

- Spencer
- Neha
- Harry
- Cole
- Paige
- Hana
- Lily
- Kylie
- Rohan

### Voices that are staying

The following Vapi Voices will continue to be fully supported and are **not** being retired:

- Elliot
- Savannah
- Leo
- Zoe
- Mia
- Jess
- Zac
- Dan
- Leah
- Tara

<Note>
If you're currently using one of the voices that are staying, no action is required on your part.
</Note>

## What this means

- **Existing assistants** using these voices will continue to work during the transition period
- **New assistants** can no longer be created using legacy voices
- **After March 1, 2026**, any assistants still using legacy voices will be automatically switched to the default replacement voice (Option 1 in the table below)

## Replacement voice mapping

We've selected replacement voices from ElevenLabs using their voice matching tool to find the closest match in tone and style. These voices are priced similarly to your existing voice.

<Note>
**Option 1 is the default fallback** — if you don't switch by March 1, your assistant will automatically be switched to the Option 1 voice.
</Note>

| Legacy Voice | Option 1 (Default Fallback) | Option 2 | Option 3 |
|--------------|----------------------------|----------|----------|
| Spencer | Penelope - `JpjuQfOymR78GvGgYe0U` | Marissa - `L0yTtpRXzdyzQlzALhgD` | Larissa - `StXdHzik5guDrDk6fg3m` |
| Neha | Navya Kannan - `Lw21wLjWqPPaL3TcYWek` | Riya Rao - `l69wlWTZVIKv0UxMucTn` | Simran - `1ea3IFhmSWgw8sJkSvfJ` |
| Harry | Rick - `hUcrqyP5BNIsY3bMyY9A` | Piksel - `iq1GS1mcjc63xtqTrsFh` | Micheal - `F6d1zUrtT0hMMRrPcNx3` |
| Cole | Terrence - `MFeqle9Un0xiXpndMbD7` | James - `IdAziNk2dxibsP2mRgAK` | Derek - `Q0Et7LOU7VpeoeCRQAVS` |
| Paige | Jöne - `UShdpPZj9t1Kgb9ACOS2` | Nessa - `6qA4mbnKOyDYLLQmx3n5` | Kimber - `fQ74DTbwd8TiAJFxu9v8` |
| Hana | Celeste - `wSRCyzJYBsTZLFcumuu8` | Freya - `u8ADrbquiJqufR9XMtb8` | Seema - `sLoLgWyZ6rs3nXR71t49` |
| Lily | Tanya - `7sAIIIXrQKek5xiLc1R6` | Melissa - `JH3fX8OSjg6sNdEtPjxr` | Ariel - `TPbSfDVirzpiSkim8gMw` |
| Kylie | Chanelle - `t5ztDJA7pj9EyW9QIcJ2` | Aryannah - `vOJuCTA36jkG6q1OskrK` | Riley - `kXsOSDWolD7e9l1Z0sbH` |
| Rohan | Manav - `T8lgQl6x5PSdhmmWx42m` | Elixified - `xCyfAutjCrYQhbBDS4l8` | Joseph - `8fcyCHOzlKDlxh1InJSf` |

## FAQs

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="How were the replacement voices selected?">
    We used ElevenLabs' voice matching tool to find the most appropriate replacements for each legacy voice based on tone, style, and characteristics. Replacements are from the same provider at the same pricing.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="What happens if I don't switch by March 1?">
    Any assistants still using legacy voices after March 1, 2026 will be automatically switched to the Option 1 (default fallback) voice shown in the table above.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Will my pricing change?">
    Replacement voices were chosen at the same pricing.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="How do I switch my voice now?">
    You can switch your assistant's voice in two ways:

    1. **Dashboard:** Go to your assistant settings and select a new voice from the dropdown
    2. **API:** Update the `voiceId` field in your assistant configuration via the API
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Can I choose a different replacement voice?">
    Yes! We provide three recommended options for each legacy voice, but you're free to choose any available voice that fits your needs. We encourage you to switch before March 1 so you can select the voice that works best for you.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="I'm an Enterprise customer — can I get help with the transition?">
    Yes. Your account team will reach out with personalized support. If you have questions in the meantime, contact your account team directly.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Who can I contact if I have questions?">
    Reach out to [support@vapi.ai](mailto:support@vapi.ai) or contact your account team if you're an Enterprise customer.
  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Are the staying voices (Elliot, Savannah, Leo, etc.) affected?">
    No. Elliot, Savannah, Leo, Zoe, Mia, Jess, Zac, Dan, Leah, and Tara are continuing and are not being retired. If you're using one of these voices, no action is required.
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>
