fern/openai-realtime.mdx, before:

---
title: OpenAI Realtime
subtitle: You can use OpenAI's newest speech-to-speech model with your Vapi assistants.
slug: openai-realtime
---

<Note>
  The Realtime API is currently in beta, and not recommended for production use by OpenAI. We're excited to have you try this new feature and welcome your [feedback](https://discord.com/invite/pUFNcf2WmH) as we continue to refine and improve the experience.
</Note>

OpenAI’s Realtime API enables developers to use a native speech-to-speech model. Unlike other Vapi configurations which orchestrate a transcriber, model and voice API to simulate speech-to-speech, OpenAI’s Realtime API natively processes audio in and audio out.

To start using it with your Vapi assistants, select `gpt-4o-realtime-preview-2024-10-01` as your model. 
- Please note that only OpenAI voices may be selected while using this model. The voice selection will not act as a TTS (text-to-speech) model, but rather as the voice used within the speech-to-speech model.
- Also note that we don’t currently support Knowledge Bases with the Realtime API.
- Lastly, note that our Realtime integration still retains the rest of Vapi's orchestration layer such as the endpointing and interruption models to enable a reliable conversational flow.

Commit message:

docs: limitations of latest realtime voice (#43)

fern/openai-realtime.mdx, after:

---
title: OpenAI Realtime
subtitle: You can use OpenAI's newest speech-to-speech model with your Vapi assistants.
slug: openai-realtime
---

<Note>
  The Realtime API is currently in beta, and not recommended for production use by OpenAI. We're excited to have you try this new feature and welcome your [feedback](https://discord.com/invite/pUFNcf2WmH) as we continue to refine and improve the experience.
</Note>

OpenAI’s Realtime API enables developers to use a native speech-to-speech model. Unlike other Vapi configurations which orchestrate a transcriber, model and voice API to simulate speech-to-speech, OpenAI’s Realtime API natively processes audio in and audio out.

To start using it with your Vapi assistants, select `gpt-4o-realtime-preview-2024-10-01` as your model. 
- Please note that only OpenAI voices may be selected while using this model. The voice selection will not act as a TTS (text-to-speech) model, but rather as the voice used within the speech-to-speech model.
- Also note that we don’t currently support Knowledge Bases with the Realtime API. Furthermore, advanced functionality is currently limited with the latest voices Ash, Ballad, Coral, Sage and Verse.
- Lastly, note that our Realtime integration still retains the rest of Vapi's orchestration layer such as the endpointing and interruption models to enable a reliable conversational flow.
