fern/overview.mdx, before:

---
title: Introduction to Vapi
subtitle: The developer platform for building voice AI agents
slug: overview
---

Vapi lets you build, test and deploy real-time voice agents. It handles the underlying infrastructure stack to your agents, making building and scaling agents as easy as possible. 

## Key capabilities
- **Conversational flow:** Turn-taking, interruptions and backchanneling
- **Low latency:** sub-600ms between turns
- **Programmable logic:** Tool calls, workflows, MCP client and server
- **Telephony and streaming:** SIP and browser calls
- **Observability:** transcripts, call metadata, logs

Vapi began as a product build on top of voice agents. After running into the complexity of managing all of the above, real-time and at scale, we built the infrastructure we wished existed — and made it available to other developers.

## What is a Voice Agent? 

We call them ***Assistants***, and they are composed of 3 parts: 


<CardGroup cols={3}>
  <Card title="Speech-To-Text (STT)">
    Audio from the user is transcribed. 
  </Card>
  <Card title="Large Language Model (LLM)">
    Transcript is fed to an LLM. 
  </Card>
  <Card title="Text-To-Speech (TTS)">
    Outputs from the LLM are spoken back ot the user.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

Each layer is highly customizable and we support dozens of models across STT, LLM and TTS. 

## Quickstart Guides
<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="Phone Calls"
    href="/quickstart/phone">
    The easiest way to start with Vapi. Build a voice agent in 5 minutes.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Web Calls"
    href="/quickstart/web">
    Quickly get started making web calls with our SDKs.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Examples

Explore end-to-end examples for some common voice workflows:

<CardGroup cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="Inbound Customer Support"
    icon="phone"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/assistants/examples/inbound-support"
  >
    We'll build a customer support agent that can process inbound phone calls and assist with common banking issues.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Appointment Scheduling"
    icon="calendar-check"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/examples/appointment-scheduling"
  >
    We'll build an automated appointment booking system for a barbershop.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Lead Qualification"
    icon="phone-office"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/examples/lead-qualification"
  >
    We'll build an outbound sales agent that can schedule appointments.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Medical Triage & Scheduling"
    icon="stethoscope"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/examples/clinic-triage-scheduling"
  >
    We'll build a medical triage workflow with emergency routing and appointment scheduling.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="E-commerce Order Management"
    icon="shopping-cart"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/examples/ecommerce-order-management"
  >
    We'll build an order management workflow for tracking, returns, and customer support.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Key Concepts

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Assistants" icon="robot" iconType="duotone" href="/assistants">
    Assistants set the foundation for applications built on Vapi.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Server URLs"
    icon="webhook"
    iconType="duotone"
    href="/server-url"
  >
    Server URLs allow Vapi to deliver your application data in realtime.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Phone Calling"
    icon="phone-volume"
    iconType="solid"
    href="/phone-calling"
  >
    Learn the ins-and-outs of telephony & conducting phone calls on Vapi.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Privacy"
    icon="signature-lock"
    iconType="duotone"
    href="security-and-privacy/hipaa"
  >
    Learn about privacy concepts like HIPAA & data privacy on Vapi.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Explore SDKs

Our SDKs are open source, and available on [our GitHub](https://github.com/VapiAI):

<CardGroup cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="Vapi Web"
    icon="window"
    iconType="duotone"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="/sdk/web"
  >
    Add a Vapi assistant to your web application.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Vapi iOS"
    icon="mobile-notch"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="https://github.com/VapiAI/ios"
  >
    Add a Vapi assistant to your iOS app.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Vapi Flutter"
    icon="mobile-notch"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="https://github.com/VapiAI/flutter"
  >
    Add a Vapi assistant to your Flutter app.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Vapi React Native"
    icon="mobile-notch"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="https://github.com/VapiAI/react-native-sdk"
  >
    Add a Vapi assistant to your React Native app.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Vapi Python"
    icon="fa-brands python"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="https://github.com/VapiAI/python"
  >
    Multi-platform. Mac, Windows, and Linux.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## FAQ

Common questions asked by other users:

<Markdown src="./snippets/faq-snippet.mdx" />

## Get Support

Join our Discord to connect with other developers & connect with our team:

<CardGroup cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="Join Our Discord"
    icon="fa-brands fa-discord"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#5A65EA"
    href="https://discord.gg/pUFNcf2WmH"
  >
    Connect with our team & other developers using Vapi.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Email Support"
    icon="mailbox"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#5A65EA"
    href="https://tally.so/r/3yD9Wx"
  >
    Send our support team an email.
  </Card>

  <Card title="GitHub" icon="fa-brands fa-github" color="#5A65EA" href="https://github.com/VapiAI">
    Check out our public SDKs. 
  </Card>

</CardGroup>

Commit message:

docs: recommend using Cursor editor in introductions (overview, quickstart, README)

fern/overview.mdx, after:

---
title: Introduction to Vapi
subtitle: The developer platform for building voice AI agents
slug: overview
---

Vapi lets you build, test and deploy real-time voice agents. It handles the underlying infrastructure stack to your agents, making building and scaling agents as easy as possible. 

<Tip>
We recommend using the **Cursor code editor** when working through these docs and examples. Cursor provides AI-assisted editing and works great with JavaScript, TypeScript, and Python projects. Download it at [cursor.com](https://cursor.com/).
</Tip>

## Key capabilities
- **Conversational flow:** Turn-taking, interruptions and backchanneling
- **Low latency:** sub-600ms between turns
- **Programmable logic:** Tool calls, workflows, MCP client and server
- **Telephony and streaming:** SIP and browser calls
- **Observability:** transcripts, call metadata, logs

Vapi began as a product build on top of voice agents. After running into the complexity of managing all of the above, real-time and at scale, we built the infrastructure we wished existed — and made it available to other developers.

## What is a Voice Agent? 

We call them ***Assistants***, and they are composed of 3 parts: 


<CardGroup cols={3}>
  <Card title="Speech-To-Text (STT)">
    Audio from the user is transcribed. 
  </Card>
  <Card title="Large Language Model (LLM)">
    Transcript is fed to an LLM. 
  </Card>
  <Card title="Text-To-Speech (TTS)">
    Outputs from the LLM are spoken back ot the user.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

Each layer is highly customizable and we support dozens of models across STT, LLM and TTS. 

## Quickstart Guides
<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card
    title="Phone Calls"
    href="/quickstart/phone">
    The easiest way to start with Vapi. Build a voice agent in 5 minutes.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Web Calls"
    href="/quickstart/web">
    Quickly get started making web calls with our SDKs.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Examples

Explore end-to-end examples for some common voice workflows:

<CardGroup cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="Inbound Customer Support"
    icon="phone"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/assistants/examples/inbound-support"
  >
    We'll build a customer support agent that can process inbound phone calls and assist with common banking issues.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Appointment Scheduling"
    icon="calendar-check"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/examples/appointment-scheduling"
  >
    We'll build an automated appointment booking system for a barbershop.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Lead Qualification"
    icon="phone-office"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/examples/lead-qualification"
  >
    We'll build an outbound sales agent that can schedule appointments.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Medical Triage & Scheduling"
    icon="stethoscope"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/examples/clinic-triage-scheduling"
  >
    We'll build a medical triage workflow with emergency routing and appointment scheduling.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="E-commerce Order Management"
    icon="shopping-cart"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#f5ac4c"
    href="/examples/ecommerce-order-management"
  >
    We'll build an order management workflow for tracking, returns, and customer support.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Key Concepts

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Assistants" icon="robot" iconType="duotone" href="/assistants">
    Assistants set the foundation for applications built on Vapi.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Server URLs"
    icon="webhook"
    iconType="duotone"
    href="/server-url"
  >
    Server URLs allow Vapi to deliver your application data in realtime.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Phone Calling"
    icon="phone-volume"
    iconType="solid"
    href="/phone-calling"
  >
    Learn the ins-and-outs of telephony & conducting phone calls on Vapi.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Privacy"
    icon="signature-lock"
    iconType="duotone"
    href="security-and-privacy/hipaa"
  >
    Learn about privacy concepts like HIPAA & data privacy on Vapi.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Explore SDKs

Our SDKs are open source, and available on [our GitHub](https://github.com/VapiAI):

<CardGroup cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="Vapi Web"
    icon="window"
    iconType="duotone"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="/sdk/web"
  >
    Add a Vapi assistant to your web application.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Vapi iOS"
    icon="mobile-notch"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="https://github.com/VapiAI/ios"
  >
    Add a Vapi assistant to your iOS app.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Vapi Flutter"
    icon="mobile-notch"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="https://github.com/VapiAI/flutter"
  >
    Add a Vapi assistant to your Flutter app.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Vapi React Native"
    icon="mobile-notch"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="https://github.com/VapiAI/react-native-sdk"
  >
    Add a Vapi assistant to your React Native app.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Vapi Python"
    icon="fa-brands python"
    color="#ffdd03"
    href="https://github.com/VapiAI/python"
  >
    Multi-platform. Mac, Windows, and Linux.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## FAQ

Common questions asked by other users:

<Markdown src="./snippets/faq-snippet.mdx" />

## Get Support

Join our Discord to connect with other developers & connect with our team:

<CardGroup cols={3}>
  <Card
    title="Join Our Discord"
    icon="fa-brands fa-discord"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#5A65EA"
    href="https://discord.gg/pUFNcf2WmH"
  >
    Connect with our team & other developers using Vapi.
  </Card>
  <Card
    title="Email Support"
    icon="mailbox"
    iconType="solid"
    color="#5A65EA"
    href="https://tally.so/r/3yD9Wx"
  >
    Send our support team an email.
  </Card>

  <Card title="GitHub" icon="fa-brands fa-github" color="#5A65EA" href="https://github.com/VapiAI">
    Check out our public SDKs. 
  </Card>

</CardGroup>
