fern/assistants/call-recording.mdx, before:

---
title: Call recording
subtitle: Record and store calls in Vapi or your own storage
slug: call-recording
---

The Call Recording feature allows you to capture and store full recordings of phone calls for analysis. By default, Vapi stores a complete recording of every call, providing both mono and stereo audio. The stereo option separates human and assistant audio into two distinct channels, offering a clearer analysis of the conversation.

You can customize this behavior in the assistant's [`assistant.artifactPlan`](https://docs.vapi.ai/api-reference/assistants/create#request.body.artifactPlan).


## Supported Formats

Vapi supports multiple audio formats for call recordings:
- `wav;l16`: 16-bit linear PCM WAV format, providing high-quality uncompressed audio in mono
- `mp3`: MP3 compressed audio format, offering good quality with smaller file sizes

You can specify your preferred format using the [`assistant.artifactPlan.recordingFormat`](https://docs.vapi.ai/api-reference/assistants/create#request.body.artifactPlan.recordingFormat) property. If not specified, recordings will default to `wav;l16`.

<Note>
At this time, you can only specify one format.
</Note>

## Custom Storage bucket

Vapi supports uploading recordings to your own storage buckets. See [Integrations -> Cloud](https://docs.vapi.ai/providers/cloud/s3) for more information on available storage options.

## Upload Path

When uploading recordings to your custom storage bucket, you can specify the upload path using the `assistant.artifactPlan.recordingPath` property. If not specified, recordings will default to the root of the bucket.

Usage:
- If you want to upload the recording to a specific path, set this to the path. Example: `/my-assistant-recordings`.
- If you want to upload the recording to the root of the bucket, set this to `/`.

## Turn On/Off Call Recording

You can turn on/off call recording by setting the [`assistant.artifactPlan.recordingEnabled`](https://docs.vapi.ai/api-reference/assistants/create#request.body.artifactPlan.recordingEnabled) property to `true` or `false`. If not specified, recordings will default to `true`.

<Note>
If [HIPAA](https://docs.vapi.ai/security-and-privacy/hipaa) mode is enabled, Vapi will only store recordings if you have defined a custom storage bucket. Make sure to set credentials in the Provider Credentials page in the Dashboard.
</Note>

## Turn On/Off Video Recording (only for webCall)

You can turn on/off video recording by setting the [`assistant.artifactPlan.videoRecordingEnabled`](https://docs.vapi.ai/api-reference/assistants/create#request.body.artifactPlan.videoRecordingEnabled) property to `true` or `false`. If not specified, video recording will default to `false`.

Commit message:

New "Get started" section (#467)
* feat(quickstart): new "Get started" section

* fix: broken links, use relative paths

* fix: voice widget redirect

fern/assistants/call-recording.mdx, after:

---
title: Call recording
subtitle: Record and store calls in Vapi or your own storage
slug: call-recording
---

The Call Recording feature allows you to capture and store full recordings of phone calls for analysis. By default, Vapi stores a complete recording of every call, providing both mono and stereo audio. The stereo option separates human and assistant audio into two distinct channels, offering a clearer analysis of the conversation.

You can customize this behavior in the assistant's [`assistant.artifactPlan`](/api-reference/assistants/create#request.body.artifactPlan).

## Recording Formats

Vapi supports multiple recording formats to fit your storage and playback needs.

You can specify your preferred format using the [`assistant.artifactPlan.recordingFormat`](/api-reference/assistants/create#request.body.artifactPlan.recordingFormat) property. If not specified, recordings will default to `wav;l16`.

**Supported formats:**
- `wav;l16` (default) - High quality linear PCM
- `mp3` - Compressed format for smaller file sizes  
- `flac` - Lossless compression for archival

## Storage Options

Vapi supports uploading recordings to your own storage buckets. See [Integrations -> Cloud](/providers/cloud/s3) for more information on available storage options.

**Supported cloud storage providers:**
- AWS S3
- Google Cloud Storage  
- Cloudflare R2
- Supabase

## Configuration Options

### Enable/Disable Recording

You can turn on/off call recording by setting the [`assistant.artifactPlan.recordingEnabled`](/api-reference/assistants/create#request.body.artifactPlan.recordingEnabled) property to `true` or `false`. If not specified, recordings will default to `true`.

**HIPAA Compliance:** If [HIPAA](/security-and-privacy/hipaa) mode is enabled, Vapi will only store recordings if you have defined a custom storage bucket. Make sure to set credentials in the Provider Credentials section of your dashboard.

### Video Recording

You can turn on/off video recording by setting the [`assistant.artifactPlan.videoRecordingEnabled`](/api-reference/assistants/create#request.body.artifactPlan.videoRecordingEnabled) property to `true` or `false`. If not specified, video recording will default to `false`.

## Upload Path

When uploading recordings to your custom storage bucket, you can specify the upload path using the `assistant.artifactPlan.recordingPath` property. If not specified, recordings will default to the root of the bucket.

Usage:
- If you want to upload the recording to a specific path, set this to the path. Example: `/my-assistant-recordings`.
- If you want to upload the recording to the root of the bucket, set this to `/`.
