fern/assistants/dynamic-variables.mdx, before:

---
title: Dynamic Variables
subtitle: >-
  Vapi makes it easy to personalize an assistant's messages and prompts using
  variables, allowing each call to be customized.
slug: assistants/dynamic-variables
---

Prompts, messages, and other assistant properties can be dynamically set when starting a call based on templates.
These templates are defined using double curly braces `{{variableName}}`.
This is useful when you want to customize the assistant for a specific call.

For example, you could set the assistant's first message to "Hello, `{{name}}`!" and then set `name` to `John` when starting the call
by passing `assistantOverrides` with `variableValues` to the API or SDK:

```json
{
  "variableValues": {
    "name": "John"
  }
}
```

## Utilizing Dynamic Variables in Phone Calls

To leverage dynamic variables during phone calls, follow these steps:

1.  **Prepare Your Request:** Construct a JSON payload containing the following key-value pairs:

    *   `assistantId`: Replace `"your-assistant-id"` with the actual ID of your assistant.
    *   `assistantOverride`: This object is used to customize your assistant's behavior.
        *   `variableValues`: An object containing the dynamic variables you want to use, in the format `{ "variableName": "variableValue" }`. For example, `{ "name": "John" }`.
    *   `customer`: An object representing the call recipient.
        *   `number`: Replace `"+1xxxxxxxxxx"` with the phone number you wish to call (in E.164 format).
    *   `phoneNumberId`: Replace `"your-phone-id"` with the ID of your registered phone number. You can get it from the [Phone number](https://dashboard.vapi.ai/phone-numbers) in the dashboard.

2.  **Send the Request:** Dispatch the JSON payload to the `/call/phone` endpoint using your preferred method (e.g., HTTP POST request).

```json
{
  "assistantId": "your-assistant-id",
  "assistantOverrides": {
    "variableValues": {
      "name": "John"
    }
  },
  "customer": {
    "number": "+1xxxxxxxxxx"
  },
  "phoneNumberId": "your-phone-id"
}
```

## Default Variables

By default, the following variables are automatically filled based on the current (UTC) time,
meaning that you don't need to set them manually in `variableValues`:

| Variable    | Description                 | Example              |
| ----------- | --------------------------- | -------------------- |
| `{{now}}`   | Current date and time (UTC) | Jan 1, 2024 12:00 PM |
| `{{date}}`  | Current date (UTC)          | Jan 1, 2024          |
| `{{time}}`  | Current time (UTC)          | 12:00 PM             |
| `{{month}}` | Current month (UTC)         | January              |
| `{{day}}`   | Current day of month (UTC)  | 1                    |
| `{{year}}`  | Current year (UTC)          | 2024                 |

**Note:** You will need to add the `{{variableName}}` in this format in all your prompts, whether it is the first message or anywhere else you want to use it.

## Advanced Date and Time Usage

We use [LiquidJS](https://liquidjs.com/) for dynamic variables. You can use the `date` filter to format the date and time in the timezone you want.

```liquid
{{"now" | date: "%b %d, %Y, %I:%M %p", "America/New_York"}}
```

This should return the current date and time in New York.

Commit message:

{{customer.number}} in dynamic variables doc (#72)

fern/assistants/dynamic-variables.mdx, after:

---
title: Dynamic Variables
subtitle: >-
  Vapi makes it easy to personalize an assistant's messages and prompts using
  variables, allowing each call to be customized.
slug: assistants/dynamic-variables
---

Prompts, messages, and other assistant properties can be dynamically set when starting a call based on templates.
These templates are defined using double curly braces `{{variableName}}`.
This is useful when you want to customize the assistant for a specific call.

For example, you could set the assistant's first message to "Hello, `{{name}}`!" and then set `name` to `John` when starting the call
by passing `assistantOverrides` with `variableValues` to the API or SDK:

```json
{
  "variableValues": {
    "name": "John"
  }
}
```

## Utilizing Dynamic Variables in Phone Calls

To leverage dynamic variables during phone calls, follow these steps:

1.  **Prepare Your Request:** Construct a JSON payload containing the following key-value pairs:

    *   `assistantId`: Replace `"your-assistant-id"` with the actual ID of your assistant.
    *   `assistantOverride`: This object is used to customize your assistant's behavior.
        *   `variableValues`: An object containing the dynamic variables you want to use, in the format `{ "variableName": "variableValue" }`. For example, `{ "name": "John" }`.
    *   `customer`: An object representing the call recipient.
        *   `number`: Replace `"+1xxxxxxxxxx"` with the phone number you wish to call (in E.164 format).
    *   `phoneNumberId`: Replace `"your-phone-id"` with the ID of your registered phone number. You can get it from the [Phone number](https://dashboard.vapi.ai/phone-numbers) in the dashboard.

2.  **Send the Request:** Dispatch the JSON payload to the `/call/phone` endpoint using your preferred method (e.g., HTTP POST request).

```json
{
  "assistantId": "your-assistant-id",
  "assistantOverrides": {
    "variableValues": {
      "name": "John"
    }
  },
  "customer": {
    "number": "+1xxxxxxxxxx"
  },
  "phoneNumberId": "your-phone-id"
}
```

**Note:** You will need to add the `{{variableName}}` in this format in all your prompts, whether it is the first message or anywhere else you want to use it.


## Default Variables

By default, the following variables are automatically filled based on the current (UTC) time,
meaning that you don't need to set them manually in `variableValues`:

| Variable                | Description                       | Example                   |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| `{{now}}`               | Current date and time (UTC)       | Jan 1, 2024 12:00 PM      |
| `{{date}}`              | Current date (UTC)                | Jan 1, 2024               |
| `{{time}}`              | Current time (UTC)                | 12:00 PM                  |
| `{{month}}`             | Current month (UTC)               | January                   |
| `{{day}}`               | Current day of month (UTC)        | 1                         |
| `{{year}}`              | Current year (UTC)                | 2024                      |
| `{{customer.number}}`   | Customer's phone number           | +1xxxxxxxxxx              |
| `{{customer.X}}`        | Any other customer property       |                           |



## Advanced Date and Time Usage

We use [LiquidJS](https://liquidjs.com/) for dynamic variables. You can use the `date` filter to format the date and time in the timezone you want.

```liquid
{{"now" | date: "%b %d, %Y, %I:%M %p", "America/New_York"}}
```

This should return the current date and time in New York.
