fern/assistants/structured-outputs.mdx, before:

---
title: Structured outputs
subtitle: Extract structured data from conversations using AI-powered analysis
slug: assistants/structured-outputs
---

## Overview

Structured outputs enable automatic extraction of specific information from voice conversations in a structured format. Define your data requirements using JSON Schema, and we will identify and extract that information from your calls.

**Key benefits:**
- Extract customer information, appointments, and orders automatically
- Validate data with JSON Schema constraints
- Use any AI model for extraction (OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, Azure)
- Reuse extraction definitions across multiple assistants

## How it works

<Steps>
  <Step title="Define your schema">
    Create a JSON Schema that describes the data you want to extract
  </Step>
  <Step title="Create structured output">
    Use the API to create a reusable structured output definition
  </Step>
  <Step title="Link to assistants or workflows">
    Connect the structured output to one or more assistants or workflows
  </Step>
  <Step title="Extract from calls">
    Data is automatically extracted after each call and stored in call artifacts
  </Step>
</Steps>

## Quick start

### Create a structured output

<CodeBlocks>
```typescript title="TypeScript (Server SDK)"
import { Vapi } from '@vapi-ai/server-sdk';

const vapi = new Vapi({ apiKey: process.env.VAPI_API_KEY });

const structuredOutput = await vapi.structuredOutputs.create({
  name: "Customer Info",
  type: "ai",
  description: "Extract customer contact information",
  schema: {
    type: "object",
    properties: {
      firstName: {
        type: "string",
        description: "Customer's first name"
      },
      lastName: {
        type: "string",
        description: "Customer's last name"
      },
      email: {
        type: "string",
        format: "email",
        description: "Customer's email address"
      },
      phone: {
        type: "string",
        pattern: "^\\+?[1-9]\\d{1,14}$",
        description: "Phone number in E.164 format"
      }
    },
    required: ["firstName", "lastName"]
  }
});

console.log('Created structured output:', structuredOutput.id);
```

```python title="Python (Server SDK)"
from vapi_python import Vapi

vapi = Vapi(api_key=os.environ['VAPI_API_KEY'])

structured_output = vapi.structured_outputs.create(
    name="Customer Info",
    type="ai",
    description="Extract customer contact information",
    schema={
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "firstName": {
                "type": "string",
                "description": "Customer's first name"
            },
            "lastName": {
                "type": "string",
                "description": "Customer's last name"
            },
            "email": {
                "type": "string",
                "format": "email",
                "description": "Customer's email address"
            },
            "phone": {
                "type": "string",
                "pattern": "^\\+?[1-9]\\d{1,14}$",
                "description": "Phone number in E.164 format"
            }
        },
        "required": ["firstName", "lastName"]
    }
)

print(f"Created structured output: {structured_output.id}")
```

```bash title="cURL"
curl -X POST https://api.vapi.ai/structured-output \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $VAPI_API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "Customer Info",
    "type": "ai",
    "description": "Extract customer contact information",
    "schema": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "firstName": {
          "type": "string",
          "description": "Customer'\''s first name"
        },
        "lastName": {
          "type": "string",
          "description": "Customer'\''s last name"
        },
        "email": {
          "type": "string",
          "format": "email",
          "description": "Customer'\''s email address"
        },
        "phone": {
          "type": "string",
          "pattern": "^\\+?[1-9]\\d{1,14}$",
          "description": "Phone number in E.164 format"
        }
      },
      "required": ["firstName", "lastName"]
    }
  }'
```
</CodeBlocks>

### Link to an assistant

Add the structured output ID to your assistant's configuration:

<CodeBlocks>
```typescript title="TypeScript (Server SDK)"
const assistant = await vapi.assistants.create({
  name: "Customer Support Agent",
  // ... other assistant configuration
  artifactPlan: {
    structuredOutputIds: [structuredOutput.id]
  }
});
```

```python title="Python (Server SDK)"
assistant = vapi.assistants.create(
    name="Customer Support Agent",
    # ... other assistant configuration
    artifact_plan={
        "structuredOutputIds": [structured_output.id]
    }
)
```

```bash title="cURL"
curl -X POST https://api.vapi.ai/assistant \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $VAPI_API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "Customer Support Agent",
    "artifactPlan": {
      "structuredOutputIds": ["output-id-here"]
    }
  }'
```
</CodeBlocks>

### Access extracted data

After a call completes, retrieve the extracted data:

<CodeBlocks>
```typescript title="TypeScript (Server SDK)"
const call = await vapi.calls.get(callId);

// Access structured outputs from call artifacts
const outputs = call.artifact?.structuredOutputs;

if (outputs) {
  for (const [outputId, data] of Object.entries(outputs)) {
    console.log(`Output: ${data.name}`);
    console.log(`Result:`, data.result);
    
    // Handle the extracted data
    if (data.result) {
      // Process successful extraction
      const { firstName, lastName, email, phone } = data.result;
      // ... save to database, send notifications, etc.
    }
  }
}
```

```python title="Python (Server SDK)"
call = vapi.calls.get(call_id)

# Access structured outputs from call artifacts
outputs = call.artifact.get('structuredOutputs', {})

for output_id, data in outputs.items():
    print(f"Output: {data['name']}")
    print(f"Result: {data['result']}")
    
    # Handle the extracted data
    if data['result']:
        # Process successful extraction
        result = data['result']
        first_name = result.get('firstName')
        last_name = result.get('lastName')
        email = result.get('email')
        phone = result.get('phone')
        # ... save to database, send notifications, etc.
```

```javascript title="Webhook Response"
// In your webhook handler
app.post('/vapi/webhook', (req, res) => {
  const { type, call } = req.body;
  
  if (type === 'call.ended') {
    const outputs = call.artifact?.structuredOutputs;
    
    if (outputs) {
      Object.entries(outputs).forEach(([outputId, data]) => {
        console.log(`Extracted ${data.name}:`, data.result);
        // Process the extracted data
      });
    }
  }
  
  res.status(200).send('OK');
});
```
</CodeBlocks>

## Schema types

### Primitive types

Extract simple values directly:

<CodeBlocks>
```json title="String"
{
  "type": "string",
  "minLength": 1,
  "maxLength": 100,
  "pattern": "^[A-Z][a-z]+$"
}
```

```json title="Number"
{
  "type": "number",
  "minimum": 0,
  "maximum": 100,
  "multipleOf": 0.5
}
```

```json title="Boolean"
{
  "type": "boolean",
  "description": "Whether customer agreed to terms"
}
```

```json title="Enum"
{
  "type": "string",
  "enum": ["small", "medium", "large", "extra-large"]
}
```
</CodeBlocks>

### Object types

Extract structured data with multiple fields:

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "name": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Full name"
    },
    "age": {
      "type": "integer",
      "minimum": 0,
      "maximum": 120
    },
    "email": {
      "type": "string",
      "format": "email"
    }
  },
  "required": ["name", "email"]
}
```

### Array types

Extract lists of items:

```json
{
  "type": "array",
  "items": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "product": {
        "type": "string"
      },
      "quantity": {
        "type": "integer",
        "minimum": 1
      }
    }
  },
  "minItems": 1,
  "maxItems": 10
}
```

### Nested structures

Extract complex hierarchical data:

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "customer": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "name": {"type": "string"},
        "contact": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "email": {"type": "string", "format": "email"},
            "phone": {"type": "string"}
          }
        }
      }
    },
    "order": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "items": {
          "type": "array",
          "items": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
              "sku": {"type": "string"},
              "quantity": {"type": "integer"}
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Validation features

### String formats

Vapi supports standard JSON Schema formats for validation:

| Format | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `email` | Email addresses | john@example.com |
| `date` | Date in YYYY-MM-DD | 2024-01-15 |
| `time` | Time in HH:MM:SS | 14:30:00 |
| `date-time` | ISO 8601 datetime | 2024-01-15T14:30:00Z |
| `uri` | Valid URI | https://example.com |
| `uuid` | UUID format | 123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000 |

### Pattern matching

Use regular expressions for custom validation:

```json
{
  "type": "string",
  "pattern": "^[A-Z]{2}-\\d{6}$",
  "description": "Order ID like US-123456"
}
```

### Conditional logic

Use `if/then/else` for conditional requirements:

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "serviceType": {
      "type": "string",
      "enum": ["emergency", "scheduled"]
    },
    "appointmentTime": {
      "type": "string",
      "format": "date-time"
    }
  },
  "if": {
    "properties": {
      "serviceType": {"const": "scheduled"}
    }
  },
  "then": {
    "required": ["appointmentTime"]
  }
}
```

## Custom models

Configure which AI model performs the extraction:

<CodeBlocks>
```typescript title="TypeScript"
const structuredOutput = await vapi.structuredOutputs.create({
  name: "Sentiment Analysis",
  type: "ai",
  schema: {
    type: "object",
    properties: {
      sentiment: {
        type: "string",
        enum: ["positive", "negative", "neutral"]
      },
      confidence: {
        type: "number",
        minimum: 0,
        maximum: 1
      }
    }
  },
  model: {
    provider: "openai",
    model: "gpt-4-turbo-preview",
    temperature: 0.1,
    messages: [
      {
        role: "system",
        content: "You are an expert at analyzing customer sentiment. Be precise and consistent."
      },
      {
        role: "user",
        content: "Analyze the sentiment of this conversation:\n{{transcript}}"
      }
    ]
  }
});
```

```python title="Python"
structured_output = vapi.structured_outputs.create(
    name="Sentiment Analysis",
    type="ai",
    schema={
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "sentiment": {
                "type": "string",
                "enum": ["positive", "negative", "neutral"]
            },
            "confidence": {
                "type": "number",
                "minimum": 0,
                "maximum": 1
            }
        }
    },
    model={
        "provider": "openai",
        "model": "gpt-4-turbo-preview",
        "temperature": 0.1,
        "messages": [
            {
                "role": "system",
                "content": "You are an expert at analyzing customer sentiment. Be precise and consistent."
            },
            {
                "role": "user",
                "content": "Analyze the sentiment of this conversation:\n{{transcript}}"
            }
        ]
    }
)
```
</CodeBlocks>

### Available variables

Use these variables in custom prompts:

- `{{transcript}}` - Full conversation transcript
- `{{messages}}` - Conversation messages array
- `{{callEndedReason}}` - How the call ended
- `{{structuredOutput.name}}` - Output name
- `{{structuredOutput.description}}` - Output description
- `{{structuredOutput.schema}}` - Schema definition

## API reference

<EndpointRequestSnippet endpoint='POST /structured-output' />

### Create structured output

<ParamField path="name" type="string" required>
  Display name for the structured output (max 40 characters)
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="type" type="string" required>
  Must be set to "ai"
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="description" type="string">
  Description of what data to extract
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="schema" type="object" required>
  JSON Schema defining the structure of data to extract
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="assistantIds" type="array">
  Array of assistant IDs to link this output to
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="model" type="object">
  Custom model configuration for extraction
</ParamField>

### Update structured output

<EndpointRequestSnippet endpoint='PATCH /structured-output/{id}' />

<Warning>
To update the top level schema type after creation, you must include `?schemaOverride=true` as a query parameter in the URL
</Warning>

### List structured outputs

<EndpointRequestSnippet endpoint='GET /structured-output' />

Query parameters:
- `page` - Page number (default: 1)
- `limit` - Results per page (default: 20, max: 100)

### Delete structured output

<EndpointRequestSnippet endpoint='DELETE /structured-output/{id}' />

## Common use cases

### Customer information collection

```json
{
  "name": "Customer Profile",
  "type": "ai",
  "schema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "name": {"type": "string"},
      "email": {"type": "string", "format": "email"},
      "phone": {"type": "string"},
      "accountNumber": {"type": "string"},
      "preferredContactMethod": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["email", "phone", "sms"]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Appointment scheduling

```json
{
  "name": "Appointment Request",
  "type": "ai",
  "schema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "preferredDate": {"type": "string", "format": "date"},
      "preferredTime": {"type": "string", "format": "time"},
      "duration": {"type": "integer", "enum": [15, 30, 45, 60]},
      "serviceType": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["consultation", "follow-up", "procedure"]
      },
      "notes": {"type": "string"}
    },
    "required": ["preferredDate", "preferredTime", "serviceType"]
  }
}
```

### Order processing

```json
{
  "name": "Order Details",
  "type": "ai",
  "schema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "items": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "product": {"type": "string"},
            "quantity": {"type": "integer", "minimum": 1},
            "specialInstructions": {"type": "string"}
          },
          "required": ["product", "quantity"]
        }
      },
      "deliveryAddress": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "street": {"type": "string"},
          "city": {"type": "string"},
          "zipCode": {"type": "string", "pattern": "^\\d{5}$"}
        }
      },
      "deliveryInstructions": {"type": "string"}
    }
  }
}
```

### Lead qualification

```json
{
  "name": "Lead Information",
  "type": "ai",
  "schema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "company": {"type": "string"},
      "role": {"type": "string"},
      "budget": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["< $10k", "$10k-50k", "$50k-100k", "> $100k"]
      },
      "timeline": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["immediate", "1-3 months", "3-6 months", "6+ months"]
      },
      "painPoints": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "nextSteps": {"type": "string"}
    }
  }
}
```

## Best practices

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Start simple" icon="seedling">
    Begin with basic schemas and add complexity as needed. Test with real conversations before adding advanced features.
  </Card>
  
  <Card title="Use descriptive names" icon="tag">
    Help the AI understand what to extract by using clear field names and descriptions in your schema.
  </Card>
  
  <Card title="Set appropriate constraints" icon="shield-check">
    Balance flexibility with validation. Too strict and extraction may fail; too loose and data quality suffers.
  </Card>
  
  <Card title="Handle optional fields" icon="question-circle">
    Only mark fields as required if they're truly essential. Use optional fields for information that might not be mentioned.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

### Performance tips

- **Keep schemas focused**: Extract only what you need to minimize processing time
- **Use appropriate models**: GPT-4 for complex schemas, GPT-3.5 for simple ones
- **Set low temperature**: Use 0.1 or lower for consistent extraction
- **Monitor success rates**: Track extraction failures and adjust schemas accordingly

### Error handling

Always check for null results which indicate extraction failure:

```typescript
if (data.result === null) {
  console.log(`Extraction failed for ${data.name}`);
  // Implement fallback logic
}
```

## Troubleshooting

### No data extracted

<Steps>
  <Step title="Verify schema validity">
    Ensure your JSON Schema is valid and properly formatted
  </Step>
  <Step title="Check conversation content">
    Confirm the required information was actually mentioned
  </Step>
  <Step title="Review assistant configuration">
    Verify the structured output ID is linked to your assistant
  </Step>
  <Step title="Test with simpler schema">
    Try a basic schema to isolate the issue
  </Step>
</Steps>

### Incorrect extraction

- Add more descriptive field descriptions
- Provide examples in custom prompts
- Use stricter validation patterns
- Lower the model temperature

### Partial extraction

- Make fields optional if they might not be mentioned
- Check if schema complexity exceeds limits
- Verify data types match expected values

## Limitations

<Warning>
- Schema updates require `?schemaOverride=true` parameter
- Extraction occurs after call completion (not real-time)
- Name field limited to 40 characters
</Warning>

## Related

- [Call analysis](/assistants/call-analysis) - Summarize and evaluate calls
- [Custom tools](/tools/custom-tools) - Trigger actions during calls
- [Webhooks](/server-url) - Receive extracted data via webhooks
- [Variables](/assistants/dynamic-variables) - Use dynamic data in conversations

Commit message:

chore: Added Section for HIPPA Enabled Orgs

fern/assistants/structured-outputs.mdx, after:

---
title: Structured outputs
subtitle: Extract structured data from conversations using AI-powered analysis
slug: assistants/structured-outputs
---

## Overview

Structured outputs enable automatic extraction of specific information from voice conversations in a structured format. Define your data requirements using JSON Schema, and we will identify and extract that information from your calls.

**Key benefits:**
- Extract customer information, appointments, and orders automatically
- Validate data with JSON Schema constraints
- Use any AI model for extraction (OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, Azure)
- Reuse extraction definitions across multiple assistants

## How it works

<Steps>
  <Step title="Define your schema">
    Create a JSON Schema that describes the data you want to extract
  </Step>
  <Step title="Create structured output">
    Use the API to create a reusable structured output definition
  </Step>
  <Step title="Link to assistants or workflows">
    Connect the structured output to one or more assistants or workflows
  </Step>
  <Step title="Extract from calls">
    Data is automatically extracted after each call and stored in call artifacts
  </Step>
</Steps>

## Quick start

### Create a structured output

<CodeBlocks>
```typescript title="TypeScript (Server SDK)"
import { Vapi } from '@vapi-ai/server-sdk';

const vapi = new Vapi({ apiKey: process.env.VAPI_API_KEY });

const structuredOutput = await vapi.structuredOutputs.create({
  name: "Customer Info",
  type: "ai",
  description: "Extract customer contact information",
  schema: {
    type: "object",
    properties: {
      firstName: {
        type: "string",
        description: "Customer's first name"
      },
      lastName: {
        type: "string",
        description: "Customer's last name"
      },
      email: {
        type: "string",
        format: "email",
        description: "Customer's email address"
      },
      phone: {
        type: "string",
        pattern: "^\\+?[1-9]\\d{1,14}$",
        description: "Phone number in E.164 format"
      }
    },
    required: ["firstName", "lastName"]
  }
});

console.log('Created structured output:', structuredOutput.id);
```

```python title="Python (Server SDK)"
from vapi_python import Vapi

vapi = Vapi(api_key=os.environ['VAPI_API_KEY'])

structured_output = vapi.structured_outputs.create(
    name="Customer Info",
    type="ai",
    description="Extract customer contact information",
    schema={
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "firstName": {
                "type": "string",
                "description": "Customer's first name"
            },
            "lastName": {
                "type": "string",
                "description": "Customer's last name"
            },
            "email": {
                "type": "string",
                "format": "email",
                "description": "Customer's email address"
            },
            "phone": {
                "type": "string",
                "pattern": "^\\+?[1-9]\\d{1,14}$",
                "description": "Phone number in E.164 format"
            }
        },
        "required": ["firstName", "lastName"]
    }
)

print(f"Created structured output: {structured_output.id}")
```

```bash title="cURL"
curl -X POST https://api.vapi.ai/structured-output \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $VAPI_API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "Customer Info",
    "type": "ai",
    "description": "Extract customer contact information",
    "schema": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "firstName": {
          "type": "string",
          "description": "Customer'\''s first name"
        },
        "lastName": {
          "type": "string",
          "description": "Customer'\''s last name"
        },
        "email": {
          "type": "string",
          "format": "email",
          "description": "Customer'\''s email address"
        },
        "phone": {
          "type": "string",
          "pattern": "^\\+?[1-9]\\d{1,14}$",
          "description": "Phone number in E.164 format"
        }
      },
      "required": ["firstName", "lastName"]
    }
  }'
```
</CodeBlocks>

### Link to an assistant

Add the structured output ID to your assistant's configuration:

<CodeBlocks>
```typescript title="TypeScript (Server SDK)"
const assistant = await vapi.assistants.create({
  name: "Customer Support Agent",
  // ... other assistant configuration
  artifactPlan: {
    structuredOutputIds: [structuredOutput.id]
  }
});
```

```python title="Python (Server SDK)"
assistant = vapi.assistants.create(
    name="Customer Support Agent",
    # ... other assistant configuration
    artifact_plan={
        "structuredOutputIds": [structured_output.id]
    }
)
```

```bash title="cURL"
curl -X POST https://api.vapi.ai/assistant \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $VAPI_API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "Customer Support Agent",
    "artifactPlan": {
      "structuredOutputIds": ["output-id-here"]
    }
  }'
```
</CodeBlocks>

### Access extracted data

After a call completes, retrieve the extracted data:

<CodeBlocks>
```typescript title="TypeScript (Server SDK)"
const call = await vapi.calls.get(callId);

// Access structured outputs from call artifacts
const outputs = call.artifact?.structuredOutputs;

if (outputs) {
  for (const [outputId, data] of Object.entries(outputs)) {
    console.log(`Output: ${data.name}`);
    console.log(`Result:`, data.result);
    
    // Handle the extracted data
    if (data.result) {
      // Process successful extraction
      const { firstName, lastName, email, phone } = data.result;
      // ... save to database, send notifications, etc.
    }
  }
}
```

```python title="Python (Server SDK)"
call = vapi.calls.get(call_id)

# Access structured outputs from call artifacts
outputs = call.artifact.get('structuredOutputs', {})

for output_id, data in outputs.items():
    print(f"Output: {data['name']}")
    print(f"Result: {data['result']}")
    
    # Handle the extracted data
    if data['result']:
        # Process successful extraction
        result = data['result']
        first_name = result.get('firstName')
        last_name = result.get('lastName')
        email = result.get('email')
        phone = result.get('phone')
        # ... save to database, send notifications, etc.
```

```javascript title="Webhook Response"
// In your webhook handler
app.post('/vapi/webhook', (req, res) => {
  const { type, call } = req.body;
  
  if (type === 'call.ended') {
    const outputs = call.artifact?.structuredOutputs;
    
    if (outputs) {
      Object.entries(outputs).forEach(([outputId, data]) => {
        console.log(`Extracted ${data.name}:`, data.result);
        // Process the extracted data
      });
    }
  }
  
  res.status(200).send('OK');
});
```
</CodeBlocks>

## Schema types

### Primitive types

Extract simple values directly:

<CodeBlocks>
```json title="String"
{
  "type": "string",
  "minLength": 1,
  "maxLength": 100,
  "pattern": "^[A-Z][a-z]+$"
}
```

```json title="Number"
{
  "type": "number",
  "minimum": 0,
  "maximum": 100,
  "multipleOf": 0.5
}
```

```json title="Boolean"
{
  "type": "boolean",
  "description": "Whether customer agreed to terms"
}
```

```json title="Enum"
{
  "type": "string",
  "enum": ["small", "medium", "large", "extra-large"]
}
```
</CodeBlocks>

### Object types

Extract structured data with multiple fields:

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "name": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Full name"
    },
    "age": {
      "type": "integer",
      "minimum": 0,
      "maximum": 120
    },
    "email": {
      "type": "string",
      "format": "email"
    }
  },
  "required": ["name", "email"]
}
```

### Array types

Extract lists of items:

```json
{
  "type": "array",
  "items": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "product": {
        "type": "string"
      },
      "quantity": {
        "type": "integer",
        "minimum": 1
      }
    }
  },
  "minItems": 1,
  "maxItems": 10
}
```

### Nested structures

Extract complex hierarchical data:

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "customer": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "name": {"type": "string"},
        "contact": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "email": {"type": "string", "format": "email"},
            "phone": {"type": "string"}
          }
        }
      }
    },
    "order": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "items": {
          "type": "array",
          "items": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
              "sku": {"type": "string"},
              "quantity": {"type": "integer"}
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Validation features

### String formats

Vapi supports standard JSON Schema formats for validation:

| Format | Description | Example |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `email` | Email addresses | john@example.com |
| `date` | Date in YYYY-MM-DD | 2024-01-15 |
| `time` | Time in HH:MM:SS | 14:30:00 |
| `date-time` | ISO 8601 datetime | 2024-01-15T14:30:00Z |
| `uri` | Valid URI | https://example.com |
| `uuid` | UUID format | 123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000 |

### Pattern matching

Use regular expressions for custom validation:

```json
{
  "type": "string",
  "pattern": "^[A-Z]{2}-\\d{6}$",
  "description": "Order ID like US-123456"
}
```

### Conditional logic

Use `if/then/else` for conditional requirements:

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "serviceType": {
      "type": "string",
      "enum": ["emergency", "scheduled"]
    },
    "appointmentTime": {
      "type": "string",
      "format": "date-time"
    }
  },
  "if": {
    "properties": {
      "serviceType": {"const": "scheduled"}
    }
  },
  "then": {
    "required": ["appointmentTime"]
  }
}
```

## Custom models

Configure which AI model performs the extraction:

<CodeBlocks>
```typescript title="TypeScript"
const structuredOutput = await vapi.structuredOutputs.create({
  name: "Sentiment Analysis",
  type: "ai",
  schema: {
    type: "object",
    properties: {
      sentiment: {
        type: "string",
        enum: ["positive", "negative", "neutral"]
      },
      confidence: {
        type: "number",
        minimum: 0,
        maximum: 1
      }
    }
  },
  model: {
    provider: "openai",
    model: "gpt-4-turbo-preview",
    temperature: 0.1,
    messages: [
      {
        role: "system",
        content: "You are an expert at analyzing customer sentiment. Be precise and consistent."
      },
      {
        role: "user",
        content: "Analyze the sentiment of this conversation:\n{{transcript}}"
      }
    ]
  }
});
```

```python title="Python"
structured_output = vapi.structured_outputs.create(
    name="Sentiment Analysis",
    type="ai",
    schema={
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "sentiment": {
                "type": "string",
                "enum": ["positive", "negative", "neutral"]
            },
            "confidence": {
                "type": "number",
                "minimum": 0,
                "maximum": 1
            }
        }
    },
    model={
        "provider": "openai",
        "model": "gpt-4-turbo-preview",
        "temperature": 0.1,
        "messages": [
            {
                "role": "system",
                "content": "You are an expert at analyzing customer sentiment. Be precise and consistent."
            },
            {
                "role": "user",
                "content": "Analyze the sentiment of this conversation:\n{{transcript}}"
            }
        ]
    }
)
```
</CodeBlocks>

### Available variables

Use these variables in custom prompts:

- `{{transcript}}` - Full conversation transcript
- `{{messages}}` - Conversation messages array
- `{{callEndedReason}}` - How the call ended
- `{{structuredOutput.name}}` - Output name
- `{{structuredOutput.description}}` - Output description
- `{{structuredOutput.schema}}` - Schema definition

## API reference

<EndpointRequestSnippet endpoint='POST /structured-output' />

### Create structured output

<ParamField path="name" type="string" required>
  Display name for the structured output (max 40 characters)
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="type" type="string" required>
  Must be set to "ai"
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="description" type="string">
  Description of what data to extract
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="schema" type="object" required>
  JSON Schema defining the structure of data to extract
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="assistantIds" type="array">
  Array of assistant IDs to link this output to
</ParamField>

<ParamField path="model" type="object">
  Custom model configuration for extraction
</ParamField>

### Update structured output

<EndpointRequestSnippet endpoint='PATCH /structured-output/{id}' />

<Warning>
To update the top level schema type after creation, you must include `?schemaOverride=true` as a query parameter in the URL
</Warning>

### List structured outputs

<EndpointRequestSnippet endpoint='GET /structured-output' />

Query parameters:
- `page` - Page number (default: 1)
- `limit` - Results per page (default: 20, max: 100)

### Delete structured output

<EndpointRequestSnippet endpoint='DELETE /structured-output/{id}' />

## Common use cases

### Customer information collection

```json
{
  "name": "Customer Profile",
  "type": "ai",
  "schema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "name": {"type": "string"},
      "email": {"type": "string", "format": "email"},
      "phone": {"type": "string"},
      "accountNumber": {"type": "string"},
      "preferredContactMethod": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["email", "phone", "sms"]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Appointment scheduling

```json
{
  "name": "Appointment Request",
  "type": "ai",
  "schema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "preferredDate": {"type": "string", "format": "date"},
      "preferredTime": {"type": "string", "format": "time"},
      "duration": {"type": "integer", "enum": [15, 30, 45, 60]},
      "serviceType": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["consultation", "follow-up", "procedure"]
      },
      "notes": {"type": "string"}
    },
    "required": ["preferredDate", "preferredTime", "serviceType"]
  }
}
```

### Order processing

```json
{
  "name": "Order Details",
  "type": "ai",
  "schema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "items": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "product": {"type": "string"},
            "quantity": {"type": "integer", "minimum": 1},
            "specialInstructions": {"type": "string"}
          },
          "required": ["product", "quantity"]
        }
      },
      "deliveryAddress": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "street": {"type": "string"},
          "city": {"type": "string"},
          "zipCode": {"type": "string", "pattern": "^\\d{5}$"}
        }
      },
      "deliveryInstructions": {"type": "string"}
    }
  }
}
```

### Lead qualification

```json
{
  "name": "Lead Information",
  "type": "ai",
  "schema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "company": {"type": "string"},
      "role": {"type": "string"},
      "budget": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["< $10k", "$10k-50k", "$50k-100k", "> $100k"]
      },
      "timeline": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["immediate", "1-3 months", "3-6 months", "6+ months"]
      },
      "painPoints": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "nextSteps": {"type": "string"}
    }
  }
}
```

## Best practices

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Start simple" icon="seedling">
    Begin with basic schemas and add complexity as needed. Test with real conversations before adding advanced features.
  </Card>
  
  <Card title="Use descriptive names" icon="tag">
    Help the AI understand what to extract by using clear field names and descriptions in your schema.
  </Card>
  
  <Card title="Set appropriate constraints" icon="shield-check">
    Balance flexibility with validation. Too strict and extraction may fail; too loose and data quality suffers.
  </Card>
  
  <Card title="Handle optional fields" icon="question-circle">
    Only mark fields as required if they're truly essential. Use optional fields for information that might not be mentioned.
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

### Performance tips

- **Keep schemas focused**: Extract only what you need to minimize processing time
- **Use appropriate models**: GPT-4 for complex schemas, GPT-3.5 for simple ones
- **Set low temperature**: Use 0.1 or lower for consistent extraction
- **Monitor success rates**: Track extraction failures and adjust schemas accordingly

### Error handling

Always check for null results which indicate extraction failure:

```typescript
if (data.result === null) {
  console.log(`Extraction failed for ${data.name}`);
  // Implement fallback logic
}
```

## Troubleshooting

### No data extracted

<Steps>
  <Step title="Verify schema validity">
    Ensure your JSON Schema is valid and properly formatted
  </Step>
  <Step title="Check conversation content">
    Confirm the required information was actually mentioned
  </Step>
  <Step title="Review assistant configuration">
    Verify the structured output ID is linked to your assistant
  </Step>
  <Step title="Test with simpler schema">
    Try a basic schema to isolate the issue
  </Step>
</Steps>

### Incorrect extraction

- Add more descriptive field descriptions
- Provide examples in custom prompts
- Use stricter validation patterns
- Lower the model temperature

### Partial extraction

- Make fields optional if they might not be mentioned
- Verify data types match expected values

## HIPAA compliance

<Warning>
**Important for HIPAA-enabled organizations:**

If your organization has HIPAA compliance enabled (`hipaaEnabled: true`), structured outputs are **disabled by default** to protect PHI (Protected Health Information).

To use structured outputs with HIPAA compliance:
- Contact the Vapi team to enable structured outputs
- Ensure you understand the implications for PHI handling
- Follow all HIPAA compliance best practices when extracting sensitive health data
</Warning>

## Limitations

<Warning>
- Schema updates require `?schemaOverride=true` parameter
- Extraction occurs after call completion (not real-time)
- Name field limited to 40 characters
</Warning>

## Related

- [Call analysis](/assistants/call-analysis) - Summarize and evaluate calls
- [Custom tools](/tools/custom-tools) - Trigger actions during calls
- [Webhooks](/server-url) - Receive extracted data via webhooks
- [Variables](/assistants/dynamic-variables) - Use dynamic data in conversations
