fern/assistants/voice-formatting-plan.mdx, before:

## What is Voice Input Formatted?

When interacting with voice assistants, you might notice terms like `Voice Input Formatted` in call logs or system outputs. This article explains what this means, how it works, and why it's important for delivering clear and natural voice interactions.

Voice Input Formatted is a function that takes raw text from a language model (LLM) and cleans it up so text-to-speech (TTS) provider can read it more naturally. It’s **on by default** in your assistant’s voice provider settings, because it helps turn things like:

- `$42.50` → `forty two dollars and fifty cents`
- `ST` → `STREET`,
- or phone numbers → spaced digits (“1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0”).

If you prefer the raw, unchanged text, you can **turn off** these transformations, which we’ll show you later.

### Log Example

![Screenshot 2025-01-21 at 10.23.19.png](https://img.notionusercontent.com/s3/prod-files-secure%2Ffdafdda2-774c-49e6-8896-a352ff4d44f3%2Ff603f2bd-36cf-4085-a3bc-f76c89a1ef75%2FScreenshot_2025-01-21_at_10.23.19.png/size/w=2000?exp=1737581744&sig=yoEEQF-BcTTgEVBNdcZh9MWHye2moRsbUcxGPjATNX8)

## 1. Step-by-Step Transformations

When `Voice Input Formatted` runs, it calls a bunch of helper functions in a row. Each one focuses on a different kind of text pattern. The entire process happens in this order:

1. **removeAngleBracketContent**
2. **removeMarkdownSymbols**
3. **removePhrasesInAsterisks**
4. **replaceNewLinesWithPeriods**
5. **replaceColonsWithPeriods**
6. **formatAcronyms**
7. **formatDollarAmounts**
8. **formatEmails**
9. **formatDates**
10. **formatTimes**
11. **formatDistances, formatUnits, formatPercentages, formatPhoneNumbers**
12. **formatNumbers**
13. **Applying Replacements**

We’ll walk you through them using a **shorter example** than before.

### 1.1 Our Simpler Example Input

```
Hello <tag> world
**Wanted** to say *hi*
We have NASA and .NET here,
call me at 123-456-7890,
price: $42.50
and the date is 2023 05 10
and time is 14:00
Distance is 5km
We might see 9999
the address is 320 ST 21 RD
my email is JOHN.DOE@example.COM

```

### 1.2 removeAngleBracketContent

- **What it does**: Removes `<anything>` unless it’s `<break>`, `<spell>`, or double angle brackets `<< >>`.
- **Example effect**: `<tag>` gets removed.

**Result so far**:

```
Hello  world
**Wanted** to say *hi*
We have NASA and .NET here,
call me at 123-456-7890,
price: $42.50
and the date is 2023 05 10
and time is 14:00
Distance is 5km
We might see 9999
the address is 320 ST 21 RD
my email is JOHN.DOE@example.COM

```

### 1.3 removeMarkdownSymbols

- **What it does**: Removes `_`, ```, or `~`. Some versions also remove double asterisks, but that might happen in a later step (next function).

In this example, there’s `**Wanted**`, which _might_ remain if we strictly only remove `_`, backticks, and tildes. If the code does remove `**` as well, it’ll vanish here or in the next step. Let’s assume it doesn’t remove them in this step.

**Result**: _No real change if the code only targets `_` , ```, and  `~`.\_

```
Hello  world
**Wanted** to say *hi*
...

```

### 1.4 removePhrasesInAsterisks

- **What it does**: Looks for `some text*` or `*some text**` and cuts it out.

In our text, we have `**Wanted**` and `*hi*`. Both get removed if the function is broad enough to remove single and double-asterisk blocks.

**Result**:

```
Hello  world
 to say
We have NASA and .NET here,
call me at 123-456-7890,
price: $42.50
and the date is 2023 05 10
and time is 14:00
Distance is 5km
We might see 9999
the address is 320 ST 21 RD
my email is JOHN.DOE@example.COM

```

### 1.5 replaceNewLinesWithPeriods

- **What it does**: Turns line breaks into `.` or `.` and merges repeated periods.

Let’s say the above text has line breaks. After this step, it’s more of a single line (or fewer lines), each newline replaced by a period.

**Result** (roughly):

```
Hello  world .  to say . We have NASA and .NET here, call me at 123-456-7890, price: $42.50 and the date is 2023 05 10 and time is 14:00 Distance is 5km We might see 9999 the address is 320 ST 21 RD my email is JOHN.DOE@example.COM

```

### 1.6 replaceColonsWithPeriods

- **What it does**: `:` → `.`

Our text has `price: $42.50`. That becomes `price. $42.50`.

**Result**:

```
Hello  world .  to say . We have NASA and .NET here, call me at 123-456-7890, price. $42.50 ...

```

### 1.7 formatAcronyms

- **What it does**:
  - If something is in a known “to-lower” list (like `NASA`, `.NET`), it becomes lowercase (`nasa`, `.net`).
  - If it’s all-caps but not recognized, it might get spaced letters. If it has vowels, it’s left alone.

In the example:

- `NASA` → `nasa`
- `.NET` → `.net`

### 1.8 formatDollarAmounts

- **What it does**: `$42.50` → “forty two dollars and fifty cents.”

### 1.9 formatEmails

- **What it does**: Replaces `@` with “ at ” and `.` with “ dot ” in emails.
- `JOHN.DOE@example.COM` → `JOHN dot DOE at example dot COM`

### 1.10 formatDates

- **What it does**: `YYYY MM DD` → e.g. “Wednesday, May 10, 2023” (if valid).
- `2023 05 10` become “Wednesday, May 10, 2023” (day name depends on how the code calculates it).

### 1.11 formatTimes

- **What it does**: `14:00` → `14` (since minutes are “00,” it remove them).
- If it was `14:30`, it might become `14 30`.

### 1.12 formatDistances, formatUnits, formatPercentages, formatPhoneNumbers

- **Distances**: `5km` → “5 kilometers.”
- **Units**: e.g. `43 lb` → “forty three pounds.”
- **Percentages**: `50%` → “50 percent.”
- **PhoneNumbers**: `123-456-7890` → `1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0`.

### 1.13 formatNumbers

- **What it does**:
  - Skips year-like numbers if they’re below current year(2025).
  - For large numbers above a cutoff (e.g. 1000 or 5000), it reads as digits.
  - Negative numbers: `9` → “minus nine.”
  - Decimals: `2.5` → “two point five.”

In our case, `9999` might be big enough to become spelled out (nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine) or digits spaced out, depending on the cutoff.

`2023` used with `05 10` might get turned into a date, so it’s handled by the date logic, not the plain number logic.

### 1.14 Applying Replacements (street-suffix expansions)

- **Runs last**. If you have user-defined replacements like `\bST\b` → `STREET`, `\bRD\b` → `ROAD`, it changes them after all the other steps.
- So `320 ST 21 RD` → `320 STREET 21 ROAD`.

**End Result**: A single line of text with all the helpful expansions and transformations done.

## 2. Formatting Plan: Customization Options

The **Formatting Plan** governs how Voice Input Formatted works. Here are the main settings you can customize:

### 2.1 Enabled

Determines whether the formatting is applied.

- **Default**: `true`
- To disable: Set `voice.chunkPlan.formatPlan.enabled = false`.

### 2.2 Number-to-Digits Cutoff

This decides when numbers are read as digits instead of words.

- **Default**: `2025` (current year).
- The code generally **doesn’t** convert numbers below the current year (like `2025`) into spelled-out words, so it stays as digits if it’s obviously a year.
- If a number is bigger than the cutoff (`numberToDigitsCutoff`), it reads digits out loud.
- Negative numbers become “minus,” decimals get “point,” etc.
- Example: With a cutoff of `2025`, numbers like `12345` will remain digits.
- To ensure larger numbers are spelled out, set the cutoff higher, like `300000`. For example:
  - `30003` → “thirty thousand and three” (with a cutoff of `300000`).

### 2.3 Replacements

Allows exact or regex-based substitutions in text.

- **Example 1**: Replace `hello` with `hi`:`{ type: 'exact', key: 'hello', value: 'hi' }`.
- **Example 2**: Replace words matching a pattern:`{ type: 'regex', regex: '\\\\b[a-zA-Z]{5}\\\\b', value: 'hi' }`.

### Note

Currently, only **replacements** and **number-to-digits cutoff** are exposed for customization. Other options, such as toggling acronym replacement, are not exposed to be toggled.

## 3. How to Turn It Off

By default, the entire pipeline is **on** because it helps TTS read better. To **turn it off**, set:

```
voice.chunkPlan.enabled = false;
// or
voice.chunkPlan.formatPlan.enabled = false;
```

Any of those flags being `false` means we **skip** calling `Voice Input Formatted`.

## 4. Conclusion

- `Voice Input Formatted` orchestrates a chain of mini-functions that together fix punctuation, expand abbreviations, and make text more readable out loud.
- You can keep it **on** for better TTS results or **off** if you need the raw LLM output.
- The final transformations, especially the user-supplied replacements (like street expansions), happen **last**, so keep that in mind it rely on other expansions earlier.

Commit message:

Add predoc information to voice-formatting-plan

fern/assistants/voice-formatting-plan.mdx, after:

---
title: Voice Formatting Plan
subtitle: >-
  Learn what voice formatting plans are and how to format voice input dynamically for clearer and more natural text-to-speech interactions.
slug: assistants/voice-formatting-plan
---

## What is Voice Input Formatted?

When interacting with voice assistants, you might notice terms like `Voice Input Formatted` in call logs or system outputs. This article explains what this means, how it works, and why it's important for delivering clear and natural voice interactions.

Voice Input Formatted is a function that takes raw text from a language model (LLM) and cleans it up so text-to-speech (TTS) provider can read it more naturally. It’s **on by default** in your assistant’s voice provider settings, because it helps turn things like:

- `$42.50` → `forty two dollars and fifty cents`
- `ST` → `STREET`,
- or phone numbers → spaced digits (“1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0”).

If you prefer the raw, unchanged text, you can **turn off** these transformations, which we’ll show you later.

### Log Example

![Screenshot 2025-01-21 at 10.23.19.png](https://img.notionusercontent.com/s3/prod-files-secure%2Ffdafdda2-774c-49e6-8896-a352ff4d44f3%2Ff603f2bd-36cf-4085-a3bc-f76c89a1ef75%2FScreenshot_2025-01-21_at_10.23.19.png/size/w=2000?exp=1737581744&sig=yoEEQF-BcTTgEVBNdcZh9MWHye2moRsbUcxGPjATNX8)

## 1. Step-by-Step Transformations

When `Voice Input Formatted` runs, it calls a bunch of helper functions in a row. Each one focuses on a different kind of text pattern. The entire process happens in this order:

1. **removeAngleBracketContent**
2. **removeMarkdownSymbols**
3. **removePhrasesInAsterisks**
4. **replaceNewLinesWithPeriods**
5. **replaceColonsWithPeriods**
6. **formatAcronyms**
7. **formatDollarAmounts**
8. **formatEmails**
9. **formatDates**
10. **formatTimes**
11. **formatDistances, formatUnits, formatPercentages, formatPhoneNumbers**
12. **formatNumbers**
13. **Applying Replacements**

We’ll walk you through them using a **shorter example** than before.

### 1.1 Our Simpler Example Input

```
Hello <tag> world
**Wanted** to say *hi*
We have NASA and .NET here,
call me at 123-456-7890,
price: $42.50
and the date is 2023 05 10
and time is 14:00
Distance is 5km
We might see 9999
the address is 320 ST 21 RD
my email is JOHN.DOE@example.COM

```

### 1.2 removeAngleBracketContent

- **What it does**: Removes `<anything>` unless it’s `<break>`, `<spell>`, or double angle brackets `<< >>`.
- **Example effect**: `<tag>` gets removed.

**Result so far**:

```
Hello  world
**Wanted** to say *hi*
We have NASA and .NET here,
call me at 123-456-7890,
price: $42.50
and the date is 2023 05 10
and time is 14:00
Distance is 5km
We might see 9999
the address is 320 ST 21 RD
my email is JOHN.DOE@example.COM

```

### 1.3 removeMarkdownSymbols

- **What it does**: Removes `_`, ```, or `~`. Some versions also remove double asterisks, but that might happen in a later step (next function).

In this example, there’s `**Wanted**`, which _might_ remain if we strictly only remove `_`, backticks, and tildes. If the code does remove `**` as well, it’ll vanish here or in the next step. Let’s assume it doesn’t remove them in this step.

**Result**: _No real change if the code only targets `_` , ```, and  `~`.\_

```
Hello  world
**Wanted** to say *hi*
...

```

### 1.4 removePhrasesInAsterisks

- **What it does**: Looks for `some text*` or `*some text**` and cuts it out.

In our text, we have `**Wanted**` and `*hi*`. Both get removed if the function is broad enough to remove single and double-asterisk blocks.

**Result**:

```
Hello  world
 to say
We have NASA and .NET here,
call me at 123-456-7890,
price: $42.50
and the date is 2023 05 10
and time is 14:00
Distance is 5km
We might see 9999
the address is 320 ST 21 RD
my email is JOHN.DOE@example.COM

```

### 1.5 replaceNewLinesWithPeriods

- **What it does**: Turns line breaks into `.` or `.` and merges repeated periods.

Let’s say the above text has line breaks. After this step, it’s more of a single line (or fewer lines), each newline replaced by a period.

**Result** (roughly):

```
Hello  world .  to say . We have NASA and .NET here, call me at 123-456-7890, price: $42.50 and the date is 2023 05 10 and time is 14:00 Distance is 5km We might see 9999 the address is 320 ST 21 RD my email is JOHN.DOE@example.COM

```

### 1.6 replaceColonsWithPeriods

- **What it does**: `:` → `.`

Our text has `price: $42.50`. That becomes `price. $42.50`.

**Result**:

```
Hello  world .  to say . We have NASA and .NET here, call me at 123-456-7890, price. $42.50 ...

```

### 1.7 formatAcronyms

- **What it does**:
  - If something is in a known “to-lower” list (like `NASA`, `.NET`), it becomes lowercase (`nasa`, `.net`).
  - If it’s all-caps but not recognized, it might get spaced letters. If it has vowels, it’s left alone.

In the example:

- `NASA` → `nasa`
- `.NET` → `.net`

### 1.8 formatDollarAmounts

- **What it does**: `$42.50` → “forty two dollars and fifty cents.”

### 1.9 formatEmails

- **What it does**: Replaces `@` with “ at ” and `.` with “ dot ” in emails.
- `JOHN.DOE@example.COM` → `JOHN dot DOE at example dot COM`

### 1.10 formatDates

- **What it does**: `YYYY MM DD` → e.g. “Wednesday, May 10, 2023” (if valid).
- `2023 05 10` become “Wednesday, May 10, 2023” (day name depends on how the code calculates it).

### 1.11 formatTimes

- **What it does**: `14:00` → `14` (since minutes are “00,” it remove them).
- If it was `14:30`, it might become `14 30`.

### 1.12 formatDistances, formatUnits, formatPercentages, formatPhoneNumbers

- **Distances**: `5km` → “5 kilometers.”
- **Units**: e.g. `43 lb` → “forty three pounds.”
- **Percentages**: `50%` → “50 percent.”
- **PhoneNumbers**: `123-456-7890` → `1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0`.

### 1.13 formatNumbers

- **What it does**:
  - Skips year-like numbers if they’re below current year(2025).
  - For large numbers above a cutoff (e.g. 1000 or 5000), it reads as digits.
  - Negative numbers: `9` → “minus nine.”
  - Decimals: `2.5` → “two point five.”

In our case, `9999` might be big enough to become spelled out (nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine) or digits spaced out, depending on the cutoff.

`2023` used with `05 10` might get turned into a date, so it’s handled by the date logic, not the plain number logic.

### 1.14 Applying Replacements (street-suffix expansions)

- **Runs last**. If you have user-defined replacements like `\bST\b` → `STREET`, `\bRD\b` → `ROAD`, it changes them after all the other steps.
- So `320 ST 21 RD` → `320 STREET 21 ROAD`.

**End Result**: A single line of text with all the helpful expansions and transformations done.

## 2. Formatting Plan: Customization Options

The **Formatting Plan** governs how Voice Input Formatted works. Here are the main settings you can customize:

### 2.1 Enabled

Determines whether the formatting is applied.

- **Default**: `true`
- To disable: Set `voice.chunkPlan.formatPlan.enabled = false`.

### 2.2 Number-to-Digits Cutoff

This decides when numbers are read as digits instead of words.

- **Default**: `2025` (current year).
- The code generally **doesn’t** convert numbers below the current year (like `2025`) into spelled-out words, so it stays as digits if it’s obviously a year.
- If a number is bigger than the cutoff (`numberToDigitsCutoff`), it reads digits out loud.
- Negative numbers become “minus,” decimals get “point,” etc.
- Example: With a cutoff of `2025`, numbers like `12345` will remain digits.
- To ensure larger numbers are spelled out, set the cutoff higher, like `300000`. For example:
  - `30003` → “thirty thousand and three” (with a cutoff of `300000`).

### 2.3 Replacements

Allows exact or regex-based substitutions in text.

- **Example 1**: Replace `hello` with `hi`:`{ type: 'exact', key: 'hello', value: 'hi' }`.
- **Example 2**: Replace words matching a pattern:`{ type: 'regex', regex: '\\\\b[a-zA-Z]{5}\\\\b', value: 'hi' }`.

### Note

Currently, only **replacements** and **number-to-digits cutoff** are exposed for customization. Other options, such as toggling acronym replacement, are not exposed to be toggled.

## 3. How to Turn It Off

By default, the entire pipeline is **on** because it helps TTS read better. To **turn it off**, set:

```
voice.chunkPlan.enabled = false;
// or
voice.chunkPlan.formatPlan.enabled = false;
```

Any of those flags being `false` means we **skip** calling `Voice Input Formatted`.

## 4. Conclusion

- `Voice Input Formatted` orchestrates a chain of mini-functions that together fix punctuation, expand abbreviations, and make text more readable out loud.
- You can keep it **on** for better TTS results or **off** if you need the raw LLM output.
- The final transformations, especially the user-supplied replacements (like street expansions), happen **last**, so keep that in mind it rely on other expansions earlier.
