fern/cli/overview.mdx, before:

---
title: Vapi CLI
description: Command-line interface for building voice AI applications faster
slug: cli
---

## Overview

The Vapi CLI is the official command-line interface that brings world-class developer experience to your terminal and IDE. Build, test, and deploy voice AI applications without leaving your development environment.

**In this guide, you'll learn to:**
- Install and authenticate with the Vapi CLI
- Initialize Vapi in existing projects
- Manage assistants, phone numbers, and workflows from your terminal
- Forward webhooks to your local development server
- Turn your IDE into a Vapi expert with MCP integration

## Installation

Install the Vapi CLI in seconds with our automated scripts:

<Tabs>
  <Tab title="macOS/Linux">
    ```bash
    curl -sSL https://vapi.ai/install.sh | bash
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Windows">
    ```powershell
    iex ((New-Object System.Net.WebClient).DownloadString('https://vapi.ai/install.ps1'))
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Docker">
    ```bash
    docker run -it ghcr.io/vapiai/cli:latest --help
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Quick start

<Steps>
  <Step title="Authenticate">
    Connect your Vapi account:
    ```bash
    vapi login
    ```
    This opens your browser for secure OAuth authentication.
  </Step>
  
  <Step title="Initialize your project">
    Add Vapi to an existing project:
    ```bash
    vapi init
    ```
    The CLI auto-detects your tech stack and sets up everything you need.
  </Step>
  
  <Step title="Create your first assistant">
    Build a voice assistant:
    ```bash
    vapi assistant create
    ```
    Follow the interactive prompts to configure your assistant.
  </Step>
</Steps>

## Key features

### 🚀 Project integration

Drop Vapi into any existing codebase with intelligent auto-detection:

```bash
vapi init
# Detected: Next.js application
# ✓ Installed @vapi-ai/web SDK
# ✓ Generated components/VapiButton.tsx
# ✓ Created pages/api/vapi/webhook.ts
# ✓ Added environment template
```

Supports React, Vue, Next.js, Python, Go, Flutter, React Native, and dozens more frameworks.

### 🤖 MCP integration

Turn your IDE into a Vapi expert with Model Context Protocol:

```bash
vapi mcp setup
```

Your IDE's AI assistant (Cursor, Windsurf, VSCode) gains complete, accurate knowledge of Vapi's APIs and best practices. No more hallucinated code or outdated examples.

### 🔗 Local webhook testing

Forward webhooks to your local server for debugging:

```bash
vapi listen --forward-to localhost:3000/webhook
```

The CLI provides a public endpoint that forwards events to your local server. You'll need to update your webhook URLs in Vapi to point to this endpoint.

<Note>
Automatic webhook URL configuration (like Stripe CLI) is coming soon. For now, manually update your webhook URLs in the Vapi dashboard.
</Note>

### 🔐 Multi-account management

Switch between organizations and environments seamlessly:

```bash
# List all authenticated accounts
vapi auth status

# Switch between accounts
vapi auth switch production

# Add another account
vapi auth login
```

### 📱 Complete feature parity

Everything you can do in the dashboard, now in your terminal:

- **Assistants**: Create, update, list, and delete voice assistants
- **Phone numbers**: Purchase, configure, and manage phone numbers
- **Calls**: Make outbound calls and view call history
- **Workflows**: Manage conversation flows (visual editing in dashboard)
- **Campaigns**: Create and manage AI phone campaigns at scale
- **Tools**: Configure custom functions and integrations
- **Webhooks**: Set up and test event delivery
- **Logs**: View system logs, call logs, and debug issues

## Common commands

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="Assistant management">
    ```bash
    # List all assistants
    vapi assistant list
    
    # Create a new assistant
    vapi assistant create
    
    # Get assistant details
    vapi assistant get <assistant-id>
    
    # Update an assistant
    vapi assistant update <assistant-id>
    
    # Delete an assistant
    vapi assistant delete <assistant-id>
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Phone number management">
    ```bash
    # List your phone numbers
    vapi phone list
    
    # Purchase a new number
    vapi phone create
    
    # Update number configuration
    vapi phone update <phone-number-id>
    
    # Release a number
    vapi phone delete <phone-number-id>
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Call operations">
    ```bash
    # List recent calls
    vapi call list
    
    # Make an outbound call
    vapi call create
    
    # Get call details
    vapi call get <call-id>
    
    # End an active call
    vapi call end <call-id>
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Debugging and logs">
    ```bash
    # View system logs
    vapi logs list
    
    # View call-specific logs
    vapi logs calls <call-id>
    
    # View error logs
    vapi logs errors
    
    # View webhook logs
    vapi logs webhooks
    ```
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Configuration

The CLI stores configuration in `~/.vapi-cli.yaml`. You can also use environment variables:

```bash
# Set API key via environment
export VAPI_API_KEY=your-api-key

# View current configuration
vapi config get

# Update configuration
vapi config set <key> <value>

# Manage analytics preferences
vapi config analytics disable
```

## Auto-updates

The CLI automatically checks for updates and notifies you when new versions are available:

```bash
# Check for updates manually
vapi update check

# Update to latest version
vapi update
```

## Next steps

Now that you have the Vapi CLI installed:

- **[Initialize a project](/cli/init):** Add Vapi to your existing codebase
- **[Set up MCP](/cli/mcp):** Enhance your IDE with Vapi intelligence
- **[Test webhooks locally](/cli/webhook):** Debug without external tunnels
- **[Manage authentication](/cli/auth):** Work with multiple accounts

---

**Resources:**
- [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/VapiAI/cli)
- [Report Issues](https://github.com/VapiAI/cli/issues)
- [Discord Community](https://discord.gg/vapi)

Commit message:

Update webhook docs with clearer tunneling and CLI guidance
Co-authored-by: dan <dan@vapi.ai>

fern/cli/overview.mdx, after:

---
title: Vapi CLI
description: Command-line interface for building voice AI applications faster
slug: cli
---

## Overview

The Vapi CLI is the official command-line interface that brings world-class developer experience to your terminal and IDE. Build, test, and deploy voice AI applications without leaving your development environment.

**In this guide, you'll learn to:**
- Install and authenticate with the Vapi CLI
- Initialize Vapi in existing projects
- Manage assistants, phone numbers, and workflows from your terminal
- Forward webhooks to your local development server
- Turn your IDE into a Vapi expert with MCP integration

## Installation

Install the Vapi CLI in seconds with our automated scripts:

<Tabs>
  <Tab title="macOS/Linux">
    ```bash
    curl -sSL https://vapi.ai/install.sh | bash
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Windows">
    ```powershell
    iex ((New-Object System.Net.WebClient).DownloadString('https://vapi.ai/install.ps1'))
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Docker">
    ```bash
    docker run -it ghcr.io/vapiai/cli:latest --help
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Quick start

<Steps>
  <Step title="Authenticate">
    Connect your Vapi account:
    ```bash
    vapi login
    ```
    This opens your browser for secure OAuth authentication.
  </Step>
  
  <Step title="Initialize your project">
    Add Vapi to an existing project:
    ```bash
    vapi init
    ```
    The CLI auto-detects your tech stack and sets up everything you need.
  </Step>
  
  <Step title="Create your first assistant">
    Build a voice assistant:
    ```bash
    vapi assistant create
    ```
    Follow the interactive prompts to configure your assistant.
  </Step>
</Steps>

## Key features

### 🚀 Project integration

Drop Vapi into any existing codebase with intelligent auto-detection:

```bash
vapi init
# Detected: Next.js application
# ✓ Installed @vapi-ai/web SDK
# ✓ Generated components/VapiButton.tsx
# ✓ Created pages/api/vapi/webhook.ts
# ✓ Added environment template
```

Supports React, Vue, Next.js, Python, Go, Flutter, React Native, and dozens more frameworks.

### 🤖 MCP integration

Turn your IDE into a Vapi expert with Model Context Protocol:

```bash
vapi mcp setup
```

Your IDE's AI assistant (Cursor, Windsurf, VSCode) gains complete, accurate knowledge of Vapi's APIs and best practices. No more hallucinated code or outdated examples.

### 🔗 Local webhook testing

Forward webhooks to your local server for debugging:

```bash
# Terminal 1: Create tunnel (e.g., with ngrok)
ngrok http 4242

# Terminal 2: Forward webhooks
vapi listen --forward-to localhost:3000/webhook
```

<Note>
**Important:** `vapi listen` is a local forwarder only - it does NOT provide a public URL. You need a separate tunneling service (like ngrok) to expose the CLI's port to the internet. Update your webhook URLs in Vapi to use the tunnel's public URL.
</Note>

### 🔐 Multi-account management

Switch between organizations and environments seamlessly:

```bash
# List all authenticated accounts
vapi auth status

# Switch between accounts
vapi auth switch production

# Add another account
vapi auth login
```

### 📱 Complete feature parity

Everything you can do in the dashboard, now in your terminal:

- **Assistants**: Create, update, list, and delete voice assistants
- **Phone numbers**: Purchase, configure, and manage phone numbers
- **Calls**: Make outbound calls and view call history
- **Workflows**: Manage conversation flows (visual editing in dashboard)
- **Campaigns**: Create and manage AI phone campaigns at scale
- **Tools**: Configure custom functions and integrations
- **Webhooks**: Set up and test event delivery
- **Logs**: View system logs, call logs, and debug issues

## Common commands

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="Assistant management">
    ```bash
    # List all assistants
    vapi assistant list
    
    # Create a new assistant
    vapi assistant create
    
    # Get assistant details
    vapi assistant get <assistant-id>
    
    # Update an assistant
    vapi assistant update <assistant-id>
    
    # Delete an assistant
    vapi assistant delete <assistant-id>
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Phone number management">
    ```bash
    # List your phone numbers
    vapi phone list
    
    # Purchase a new number
    vapi phone create
    
    # Update number configuration
    vapi phone update <phone-number-id>
    
    # Release a number
    vapi phone delete <phone-number-id>
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Call operations">
    ```bash
    # List recent calls
    vapi call list
    
    # Make an outbound call
    vapi call create
    
    # Get call details
    vapi call get <call-id>
    
    # End an active call
    vapi call end <call-id>
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Debugging and logs">
    ```bash
    # View system logs
    vapi logs list
    
    # View call-specific logs
    vapi logs calls <call-id>
    
    # View error logs
    vapi logs errors
    
    # View webhook logs
    vapi logs webhooks
    ```
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Configuration

The CLI stores configuration in `~/.vapi-cli.yaml`. You can also use environment variables:

```bash
# Set API key via environment
export VAPI_API_KEY=your-api-key

# View current configuration
vapi config get

# Update configuration
vapi config set <key> <value>

# Manage analytics preferences
vapi config analytics disable
```

## Auto-updates

The CLI automatically checks for updates and notifies you when new versions are available:

```bash
# Check for updates manually
vapi update check

# Update to latest version
vapi update
```

## Next steps

Now that you have the Vapi CLI installed:

- **[Initialize a project](/cli/init):** Add Vapi to your existing codebase
- **[Set up MCP](/cli/mcp):** Enhance your IDE with Vapi intelligence
- **[Test webhooks locally](/cli/webhook):** Debug webhooks with tunneling services
- **[Manage authentication](/cli/auth):** Work with multiple accounts

---

**Resources:**
- [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/VapiAI/cli)
- [Report Issues](https://github.com/VapiAI/cli/issues)
- [Discord Community](https://discord.gg/vapi)
