fern/workflows/edges/ai-conditions.mdx, before:

---
title: AI Conditions
subtitle: Dynamic AI-driven branching in workflows
slug: /workflows/edges/ai-conditions
---

## Overview

The **AI Conditions** feature leverages artificial intelligence to determine the next step in your workflow based on conversation context. Unlike traditional logical conditions—which rely on explicit rules—AI Conditions allow your voice agent to evaluate complex or ambiguous scenarios, making branching decisions dynamically.

## How It Works

- **Contextual Evaluation:** The AI considers data from previous steps (e.g., user input, API responses) to gauge the conversation context.
- **Adaptive Decision-Making:** It uses its judgment to choose the most appropriate branch without relying solely on fixed comparisons.
- **Seamless Integration:** AI Conditions can complement existing logical conditions, offering a balance between predictable rules and adaptive behavior.

## Configuration

- **Activation:** Enable AI Conditions on a condition node where you want the AI to drive the branching logic.
- **Context Input:** The AI will utilize variables collected from Gather verbs and data returned from API requests.
- **Decision Logic:** No manual rules are required—the AI interprets context in real time to select the optimal branch.
- **Fallback:** You can combine AI Conditions with traditional logical conditions for added control.

## Usage

Deploy AI Conditions when your workflow requires flexibility and context-sensitive decision-making, such as:

- Handling ambiguous or multi-faceted user responses.
- Addressing scenarios where strict rules may not capture the conversation's nuances.
- Enhancing the user experience by providing more natural, human-like interactions.

For detailed configuration instructions and best practices, please refer to our dedicated documentation on AI-driven workflows.

Commit message:

add AI condition page and more details on logic condition

fern/workflows/edges/ai-conditions.mdx, after:

---
title: AI Conditions
subtitle: Smart workflow branching powered by AI
slug: /workflows/edges/ai-conditions
---

## Overview

AI Conditions use artificial intelligence to decide the next step in your workflow based on the conversation. Instead of using fixed rules, they can understand complex situations and make smart decisions in real-time.

## How It Works

1. The AI looks at the conversation history and context
2. It makes a smart decision about which path to take, based on variables collected from Gather verbs and data returned from API requests.
3. Works alongside your existing rules for maximum flexibility


## Configuration
- **Condition Node:** Start by inserting a condition node into your workflow.
- **Branch Setup:** Attach one or more nodes to the condition node.
- **AI Tag:** Click on the connecting edge and choose `AI` from the `Condition Type` dropdown
- **AI Condition** Use the input to define when the chosen branch should be taken.

## Usage

Use AI Conditions when you need:
- To handle unclear or complex user responses
- More flexibility than traditional rules can provide
- More natural, human-like conversations
