fern/tools/code-tool.mdx, before:

---
title: Code Tool
subtitle: Execute custom TypeScript code directly within your assistant without setting up a server.
slug: tools/code-tool
---

The Code Tool allows you to write and execute custom TypeScript code that runs when your assistant needs to perform a specific action. Unlike custom function tools that require you to host a server, code tools run directly on Vapi's infrastructure.

## When to Use Code Tools

Code tools are ideal when you need to:
- Transform or process data during a conversation
- Make HTTP requests to external APIs
- Perform calculations or business logic
- Avoid the overhead of setting up and maintaining a webhook server

## Creating a Code Tool

### Step 1: Navigate to the Tools Section

1. Open your [Vapi Dashboard](https://dashboard.vapi.ai)
2. Click **Tools** in the left sidebar
3. Click **Create Tool** and select **Code**

### Step 2: Configure Your Code Tool

The dashboard provides a visual interface to configure your code tool:

1. **Tool Name**: A descriptive identifier (e.g., `get_customer_data`)
2. **Description**: Explain what your tool does - this helps the AI understand when to use it
3. **TypeScript Code**: Write the code that will execute when the tool is called
4. **Parameters**: Define the input parameters your code expects
5. **Environment Variables**: Store sensitive values like API keys securely

### Step 3: Write Your Code

Your code has access to two objects:
- **`args`**: Contains the parameters passed by the assistant
- **`env`**: Contains your environment variables

```typescript
// Access parameters from the assistant
const { customerId, orderType } = args;

// Access secure environment variables
const { API_KEY, API_URL } = env;

// Make HTTP requests to external services
const response = await fetch(`${API_URL}/customers/${customerId}`, {
  headers: {
    'Authorization': `Bearer ${API_KEY}`,
    'Content-Type': 'application/json'
  }
});

const customer = await response.json();

// Return data to the assistant
return {
  name: customer.name,
  email: customer.email,
  memberSince: customer.createdAt
};
```

<Note>
Your code runs in an isolated environment with a configurable timeout (default: 10 seconds, max: 60 seconds).
</Note>

## Example: Customer Lookup Tool

Let's create a tool that looks up customer information:

### Configuration

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| Tool Name | `get_customer` |
| Description | Retrieves customer information by their ID |

### Parameters

| Name | Type | Required | Description |
|------|------|----------|-------------|
| customerId | string | Yes | The unique customer identifier |

### Environment Variables

| Name | Value |
|------|-------|
| API_KEY | Your API key |
| API_BASE_URL | https://api.yourservice.com |

### Code

```typescript
const { customerId } = args;
const { API_KEY, API_BASE_URL } = env;

const response = await fetch(`${API_BASE_URL}/customers/${customerId}`, {
  headers: {
    'Authorization': `Bearer ${API_KEY}`
  }
});

if (!response.ok) {
  return { error: 'Customer not found' };
}

const customer = await response.json();

return {
  name: customer.name,
  email: customer.email,
  plan: customer.subscription.plan,
  status: customer.status
};
```

## Example: Order Processing Tool

A more complex example that processes an order:

### Parameters

| Name | Type | Required | Description |
|------|------|----------|-------------|
| items | array | Yes | Array of item objects with id and quantity |
| customerId | string | Yes | The customer placing the order |
| shippingAddress | string | No | Delivery address |

### Code

```typescript
const { items, customerId, shippingAddress } = args;
const { ORDER_API_KEY, ORDER_API_URL } = env;

// Calculate total
let total = 0;
const itemDetails = [];

for (const item of items) {
  const priceResponse = await fetch(`${ORDER_API_URL}/products/${item.id}`);
  const product = await priceResponse.json();
  
  const itemTotal = product.price * item.quantity;
  total += itemTotal;
  
  itemDetails.push({
    name: product.name,
    quantity: item.quantity,
    price: product.price,
    subtotal: itemTotal
  });
}

// Create the order
const orderResponse = await fetch(`${ORDER_API_URL}/orders`, {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: {
    'Authorization': `Bearer ${ORDER_API_KEY}`,
    'Content-Type': 'application/json'
  },
  body: JSON.stringify({
    customerId,
    items: itemDetails,
    total,
    shippingAddress
  })
});

const order = await orderResponse.json();

return {
  orderId: order.id,
  total: `$${total.toFixed(2)}`,
  estimatedDelivery: order.estimatedDelivery,
  items: itemDetails.map(i => `${i.quantity}x ${i.name}`)
};
```

## Using Code Tools in Assistants

Once created, add your code tool to any assistant:

### In the Dashboard

1. Go to **Assistants** → Select your assistant
2. Navigate to the **Tools** tab
3. Click **Add Tool** and select your code tool
4. Save your assistant configuration

### Via API

```bash
curl --location --request PATCH 'https://api.vapi.ai/assistant/ASSISTANT_ID' \
--header 'Authorization: Bearer <YOUR_API_KEY>' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--data '{
    "model": {
        "toolIds": ["your-code-tool-id"]
    }
}'
```

## Creating Code Tools via API

You can also create code tools programmatically:

```bash
curl --location 'https://api.vapi.ai/tool' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--header 'Authorization: Bearer <YOUR_API_KEY>' \
--data '{
    "type": "code",
    "name": "get_customer",
    "description": "Retrieves customer information by their ID",
    "code": "const { customerId } = args;\nconst { API_KEY } = env;\n\nconst response = await fetch(`https://api.example.com/customers/${customerId}`, {\n  headers: { \"Authorization\": `Bearer ${API_KEY}` }\n});\n\nreturn await response.json();",
    "parameters": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "customerId": {
                "type": "string",
                "description": "The unique customer identifier"
            }
        },
        "required": ["customerId"]
    },
    "environmentVariables": [
        {
            "name": "API_KEY",
            "value": "your-api-key-here"
        }
    ]
}'
```

## Best Practices

### Security
- Store sensitive values (API keys, secrets) in **Environment Variables**, not in your code
- Environment variable values support Liquid templates to reference call variables

### Performance
- Keep code execution under the timeout limit
- Use efficient API calls and avoid unnecessary loops
- Consider caching strategies for repeated lookups

### Error Handling
- Always handle potential errors from API calls
- Return meaningful error messages that help the assistant respond appropriately

```typescript
const { customerId } = args;

try {
  const response = await fetch(`${env.API_URL}/customers/${customerId}`);
  
  if (!response.ok) {
    return { 
      error: true, 
      message: `Customer ${customerId} not found` 
    };
  }
  
  return await response.json();
} catch (error) {
  return { 
    error: true, 
    message: 'Unable to reach customer service' 
  };
}
```

### Return Values
- Return structured data that the assistant can easily interpret
- Include relevant information the assistant needs to continue the conversation

## Limitations

- **Timeout**: Maximum execution time is 60 seconds (default: 10 seconds)
- **No file system access**: Code runs in an isolated environment without file access
- **Memory**: Code runs with limited memory allocation
- **Network**: Only outbound HTTP/HTTPS requests are supported

## Code Tool vs Custom Function Tool

| Feature | Code Tool | Custom Function Tool |
|---------|-----------|---------------------|
| Server Required | No | Yes |
| Language | TypeScript | Any |
| Setup Complexity | Low | Higher |
| Customization | Moderate | Full control |
| Secrets Management | Environment Variables | Your server |
| Best For | Quick integrations, API calls | Complex logic, existing infrastructure |

Choose **Code Tools** when you want to quickly add functionality without managing infrastructure. Choose **Custom Function Tools** when you need full control over the execution environment or have existing server infrastructure.

Commit message:

fix: remove dashboard references from code tool docs

fern/tools/code-tool.mdx, after:

---
title: Code Tool
subtitle: Execute custom TypeScript code directly within your assistant without setting up a server.
slug: tools/code-tool
---

The Code Tool allows you to write and execute custom TypeScript code that runs when your assistant needs to perform a specific action. Unlike custom function tools that require you to host a server, code tools run directly on Vapi's infrastructure.

## When to Use Code Tools

Code tools are ideal when you need to:
- Transform or process data during a conversation
- Make HTTP requests to external APIs
- Perform calculations or business logic
- Avoid the overhead of setting up and maintaining a webhook server

## Creating a Code Tool

Create code tools using the [Vapi API](/api-reference/tools/create). Each code tool requires:

- **Tool Name**: A descriptive identifier (e.g., `get_customer_data`)
- **Description**: Explain what your tool does - this helps the AI understand when to use it
- **TypeScript Code**: Write the code that will execute when the tool is called
- **Parameters**: Define the input parameters your code expects
- **Environment Variables**: Store sensitive values like API keys securely

### Writing Your Code

Your code has access to two objects:
- **`args`**: Contains the parameters passed by the assistant
- **`env`**: Contains your environment variables

```typescript
// Access parameters from the assistant
const { customerId, orderType } = args;

// Access secure environment variables
const { API_KEY, API_URL } = env;

// Make HTTP requests to external services
const response = await fetch(`${API_URL}/customers/${customerId}`, {
  headers: {
    'Authorization': `Bearer ${API_KEY}`,
    'Content-Type': 'application/json'
  }
});

const customer = await response.json();

// Return data to the assistant
return {
  name: customer.name,
  email: customer.email,
  memberSince: customer.createdAt
};
```

<Note>
Your code runs in an isolated environment with a configurable timeout (default: 10 seconds, max: 60 seconds).
</Note>

## Example: Customer Lookup Tool

Let's create a tool that looks up customer information:

### Configuration

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| Tool Name | `get_customer` |
| Description | Retrieves customer information by their ID |

### Parameters

| Name | Type | Required | Description |
|------|------|----------|-------------|
| customerId | string | Yes | The unique customer identifier |

### Environment Variables

| Name | Value |
|------|-------|
| API_KEY | Your API key |
| API_BASE_URL | https://api.yourservice.com |

### Code

```typescript
const { customerId } = args;
const { API_KEY, API_BASE_URL } = env;

const response = await fetch(`${API_BASE_URL}/customers/${customerId}`, {
  headers: {
    'Authorization': `Bearer ${API_KEY}`
  }
});

if (!response.ok) {
  return { error: 'Customer not found' };
}

const customer = await response.json();

return {
  name: customer.name,
  email: customer.email,
  plan: customer.subscription.plan,
  status: customer.status
};
```

## Example: Order Processing Tool

A more complex example that processes an order:

### Parameters

| Name | Type | Required | Description |
|------|------|----------|-------------|
| items | array | Yes | Array of item objects with id and quantity |
| customerId | string | Yes | The customer placing the order |
| shippingAddress | string | No | Delivery address |

### Code

```typescript
const { items, customerId, shippingAddress } = args;
const { ORDER_API_KEY, ORDER_API_URL } = env;

// Calculate total
let total = 0;
const itemDetails = [];

for (const item of items) {
  const priceResponse = await fetch(`${ORDER_API_URL}/products/${item.id}`);
  const product = await priceResponse.json();
  
  const itemTotal = product.price * item.quantity;
  total += itemTotal;
  
  itemDetails.push({
    name: product.name,
    quantity: item.quantity,
    price: product.price,
    subtotal: itemTotal
  });
}

// Create the order
const orderResponse = await fetch(`${ORDER_API_URL}/orders`, {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: {
    'Authorization': `Bearer ${ORDER_API_KEY}`,
    'Content-Type': 'application/json'
  },
  body: JSON.stringify({
    customerId,
    items: itemDetails,
    total,
    shippingAddress
  })
});

const order = await orderResponse.json();

return {
  orderId: order.id,
  total: `$${total.toFixed(2)}`,
  estimatedDelivery: order.estimatedDelivery,
  items: itemDetails.map(i => `${i.quantity}x ${i.name}`)
};
```

## Using Code Tools in Assistants

Once created, add your code tool to any assistant by updating the assistant configuration via API:

```bash
curl --location --request PATCH 'https://api.vapi.ai/assistant/ASSISTANT_ID' \
--header 'Authorization: Bearer <YOUR_API_KEY>' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--data '{
    "model": {
        "toolIds": ["your-code-tool-id"]
    }
}'
```

## Creating Code Tools via API

Create code tools programmatically with the following request:

```bash
curl --location 'https://api.vapi.ai/tool' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--header 'Authorization: Bearer <YOUR_API_KEY>' \
--data '{
    "type": "code",
    "name": "get_customer",
    "description": "Retrieves customer information by their ID",
    "code": "const { customerId } = args;\nconst { API_KEY } = env;\n\nconst response = await fetch(`https://api.example.com/customers/${customerId}`, {\n  headers: { \"Authorization\": `Bearer ${API_KEY}` }\n});\n\nreturn await response.json();",
    "parameters": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "customerId": {
                "type": "string",
                "description": "The unique customer identifier"
            }
        },
        "required": ["customerId"]
    },
    "environmentVariables": [
        {
            "name": "API_KEY",
            "value": "your-api-key-here"
        }
    ]
}'
```

## Best Practices

### Security
- Store sensitive values (API keys, secrets) in **Environment Variables**, not in your code
- Environment variable values support Liquid templates to reference call variables

### Performance
- Keep code execution under the timeout limit
- Use efficient API calls and avoid unnecessary loops
- Consider caching strategies for repeated lookups

### Error Handling
- Always handle potential errors from API calls
- Return meaningful error messages that help the assistant respond appropriately

```typescript
const { customerId } = args;

try {
  const response = await fetch(`${env.API_URL}/customers/${customerId}`);
  
  if (!response.ok) {
    return { 
      error: true, 
      message: `Customer ${customerId} not found` 
    };
  }
  
  return await response.json();
} catch (error) {
  return { 
    error: true, 
    message: 'Unable to reach customer service' 
  };
}
```

### Return Values
- Return structured data that the assistant can easily interpret
- Include relevant information the assistant needs to continue the conversation

## Limitations

- **Timeout**: Maximum execution time is 60 seconds (default: 10 seconds)
- **No file system access**: Code runs in an isolated environment without file access
- **Memory**: Code runs with limited memory allocation
- **Network**: Only outbound HTTP/HTTPS requests are supported

## Code Tool vs Custom Function Tool

| Feature | Code Tool | Custom Function Tool |
|---------|-----------|---------------------|
| Server Required | No | Yes |
| Language | TypeScript | Any |
| Setup Complexity | Low | Higher |
| Customization | Moderate | Full control |
| Secrets Management | Environment Variables | Your server |
| Best For | Quick integrations, API calls | Complex logic, existing infrastructure |

Choose **Code Tools** when you want to quickly add functionality without managing infrastructure. Choose **Custom Function Tools** when you need full control over the execution environment or have existing server infrastructure.
